Moved by pity for her husband, the Countess at last found out the cause
of his illness, and entreated him to allow himself to be cured. But the
Count in his pride refused more than ever to give his consent to the
marriage.

So the lady resolved to go without his knowledge to pray for mercy from
the spinner, and in the name of Renelde's dead mother she besought her
to spin no more. Renelde gave her promise, but in the evening Guilbert
arrived at the cottage. Seeing that the cloth was no farther advanced
than it was the evening before, he inquired the reason. Renelde
confessed that the Countess had prayed her not to let her husband die.

'Will he consent to our marriage?'

'No.'

'Let him die then.'

'But what will the Countess say?'

'The Countess will understand that it is not your fault; the Count alone
is guilty of his own death.'

'Let us wait a little. Perhaps his heart may be softened.'

So they waited for one month, for two, for six, for a year. The spinner
spun no more. The Count had ceased to persecute her, but he still
refused his consent to the marriage. Guilbert became impatient.

The poor girl loved him with her whole soul, and she was more unhappy
than she had been before, when Burchard was only tormenting her body.

'Let us have done with it,' said Guilbert.

'Wait a little still,' pleaded Renelde.

But the young man grew weary. He came more rarely to Locquignol, and
very soon he did not come at all. Renelde felt as if her heart would
break, but she held firm.

One day she met the Count. She clasped her hands as if in prayer, and
cried:

'My lord, have mercy!'

Burchard the Wolf turned away his head and passed on.

She might have humbled his pride had she gone to her spinning-wheel
again, but she did nothing of the sort.

Not long after she learnt that Guilbert had left the country. He did not
even come to say good-bye to her, but, all the same, she knew the day
and hour of his departure, and hid herself on the road to see him once
more.

When she came in she put her silent wheel into a corner, and cried for
three days and three nights.