The march of the Caravan proceeded the next day without hinderance,
and when they halted, Selim the Stranger began thus to speak to Muley,
the youngest of the merchants:

"You are, indeed, the youngest of us, nevertheless you are always in
fine spirits, and, to a certainty, know for us, some right merry
story. Out with it then, that it may refresh us after the heat of the
day."

"I might easily tell you something," answered Muley, "which would
amuse you, nevertheless modesty becomes youth in all things; therefore
must my older companions have the precedence. Zaleukos is ever so
grave and reserved; should not he tell us what has made his life so
serious? Perhaps we could assuage his grief, if such he have; for
gladly would we serve a brother, even if he belong to another creed."

The person alluded to was a Grecian merchant of middle age, handsome
and strongly built, but very serious. Although he was an unbeliever,
(that is, no Mussulman,) still his companions were much attached to
him, for his whole conduct had inspired them with respect and
confidence. He had only one hand, and some of his companions
conjectured that, perhaps, this loss gave so grave a tone to his
character. Zaleukos thus answered Muley's friendly request:

"I am much honored by your confidence: grief have I none, at least
none from which, even with your best wishes, you can relieve me.
Nevertheless, since Muley appears to blame me for my seriousness, I
will relate to you something which will justify me when I am more
grave than others. You see that I have lost my left hand; this came
not to me at my birth, but I lost it in the most unhappy days of my
life. Whether I bear the fault thereof, whether I am wrong to be more
serious than my condition in life would seem to make me, you must
decide, when I have told you the STORY OF THE HEWN-OFF HAND."