The Wezeer proceeded with the King's daughter, and continued his days'
journeys and his route over the wastes, travelling with diligence by
night and day, until there remained between him and his country a
journey of three days; whereupon he sent forward a messenger to the King
Suleyman Shah to inform him of the approach of the bride. So the
messenger hasted in his journey till he arrived in the presence of the
King, and acquainted him with the approach of the bride; and the King
was rejoiced, and bestowed a robe of honour upon the messenger, and
ordered his troops to go forth in grand procession to meet the bride and
her attendants with honour, desiring them to equip themselves in the
gayest manner, and to unfurl the standards over their heads. And they
complied with his commands; and a crier proclaimed through the city,
that no curtained damsel nor honoured lady nor infirm old woman should
fail to go forth to meet the bride. So they all went forth to meet her,
and the chief among them accompanied her to serve her. They decided
together to conduct her towards night to the King's palace, and the
chief officers of the court agreed to decorate the streets, and to stand
while the bride passed by them with the eunuchs and female slaves before
her, she herself being clad in the dress which her father gave her. And
when she approached, the troops surrounded her, ranged on the right and
left, and the litter advanced with her until it drew near to the palace;
and there was no one who did not come forth to see it: the drums were
beaten, and the spears brandished, and the trumpets sounded, and sweet
odours were diffused around, and the standards flapped, and the horses
raced with each other, until they arrived at the gate of the palace,
when the pages advanced with the litter to the entrance of the areem:
the palace was illuminated by its splendour, and its walls shone with
the lustre of its ornaments; and at night the eunuchs opened the doors
of the inner apartment, and stood surrounding the chief entrance. The
bride then came forward among the female slaves, like the moon among the
stars, or the chief pearl among the minor pearls of the string, and she
entered the apartment, where they had placed for her a couch of
alabaster set with pearls and jewels. Upon this she seated herself, and
the King came in to visit her, and God inspired his heart with love for
her, so that his disquietude and trouble ceased.

He remained with her about a month, after which he went forth and sat
upon his throne, and administered justice to his subjects; and towards
daybreak on the morning after the expiration of the ninth month, his
wife gave birth to a male child of an auspicious appearance. When the
King heard of it, he rejoiced exceedingly, and gave a large sum of money
to the bearer of the good tidings; and in his joy he went to the child,
and kissed him between the eyes, wondering at his surpassing beauty. The
midwives took him, and blackened the edges of his eyelids with
kol;
He was nourished on the bosom of indulgence, and reared in the lap of
prosperity, and days and years passed until he attained the age of seven
years; whereupon the King Suleyman Shah summoned the men of learning and
science, and ordered them to instruct his son in writing and science and
polite literature, and they continued to do so for some years, until he
had learnt what was requisite; and when he was acquainted with all that
the King desired, he caused him to be brought from the professors and
teachers, and engaged for him a master to instruct him in horsemanship,
who continued to teach him until his pupil was fourteen years of age.
Whenever the youth went forth on any business, every one who beheld him
was ravished by his beauty, so that they composed verses in his praise,
and even the women of virtue were overcome by love for him, through the
surpassing beauty with which he was endowed. And when he had attained
the age of eighteen years, the grey down appeared upon a mole on his red
cheek, while another mole, like a globule of ambergris, added to these
charms, and he captivated the minds and eyes of his beholders. His
comeliness increased as he became a man, and he had companions and
friends, and every one who enjoyed access to him wished that
Taj-el-Mulook might be Sulan after the death of his father, and that he
might himself be one of his emeers.