When Selim Baruch had finished his story, the merchants declared
themselves delighted therewith. "Verily, the afternoon has passed away
from us without our having observed it!" exclaimed one of them,
throwing back the covering of the tent: "the evening wind blows cool,
we can still make a good distance on our journey." To this his
companions agreed; the tents were struck, and the Caravan proceeded on
its way in the same order in which it had come up.

They rode almost all the night long, for it was refreshing and
starry, whereas the day was sultry. At last they arrived at a
convenient stopping-place; here they pitched their tents, and composed
themselves to rest. To the stranger the merchants attended, as a most
valued guest. One gave him cushions, a second covering, a third
slaves; in a word, he was as well provided for as if he had been at
home. The hottest hours of the day had already arrived, when they
awoke again, and they unanimously determined to wait for evening in
this place. After they had eaten together, they moved more closely to
each other, and the young merchant, turning to the oldest, addressed
him: "Selim Baruch yesterday made a pleasant afternoon for us; suppose
Achmet, that you also tell us something, be it either from your long
life, which has known so many adventures, or even a pretty Marchen."

Upon these words Achmet was silent some time, as if he were in doubt
whether to tell this or that; at last he began to speak: "Dear
friends, on this our journey you have proved yourselves faithful
companions, and Selim also deserves my confidence; I will therefore
impart to you something of my life, of which, under other
circumstances, I would speak reluctantly, and, indeed, not to any one:
THE HISTORY OF THE SPECTRE SHIP."