The next day the Prince arose early and took leave of his host.

'The wood that you saw in your dream is not far from here,' said the
old man. 'It is in the depth of the forest, and this road will lead you
there. You will come to a vast park surrounded by high walls. In the
middle of the park is a castle, where dwells a horrible witch who allows
no living being to enter the doors. Behind the castle is the orange
grove. Follow the wall till you come to a heavy iron gate. Don't try to
press it open, but oil the hinges with this,' and the old man gave him a
small bottle.

'The gate will open of itself,' he continued, 'and a huge dog which
guards the castle will come to you with his mouth wide open, but just
throw him this oat cake. Next, you will see a baking woman leaning over
her heated oven. Give her this brush. Lastly, you will find a well on
your left; do not forget to take the cord of the bucket and spread it in
the sun. When you have done this, do not enter the castle, but go round
it and enter the orange grove. Then gather three oranges, and get back
to the gate as fast as you can. Once out of the gate, leave the forest
by the opposite side.

'Now, attend to this: whatever happens, do not open your oranges till
you reach the bank of a river, or a fountain. Out of each orange will
come a princess, and you can choose which you like for your wife. Your
choice once made, be very careful never to leave your bride for an
instant, and remember that the danger which is most to be feared is
never the danger we are most afraid of.'