NOTES TO CHAPTER THIRD.

NOTE 1.--_On the Uses of Palm-sticks in various Manufactures._ The kind
of crate here mentioned is made of jereeds, or palm-sticks, which (being
very soft, and easily cut and punched, in their fresh state, and very
tough, difficult to break, and light, when dry,) are used in a great
variety of manufactures. In making crates or baskets, and stools,
bed-frames, coops, &c., a number of jereeds, being placed an inch or
more apart, are fixed by two, three, or more, thicker ones, placed
transversely. Round holes are punched in the latter, through which the
former are inserted; and the whole becomes light and strong as soon as
it is dry. Chests are made with thick jereeds placed close together, and
others, pared thin, passing transversely through them.

NOTE 2.--_Description of the Veils of Arab Women._ The modern izar or
eezar (for the word is written in two different ways), of Arab women, is
a piece of drapery commonly worn by them when they appear in public. It
is about two yards or more in width (according to the height of the
wearer), and three yards in length: one edge of it being drawn from
behind, over the upper part of the head and the forehead, and secured by
a band sewed inside, the rest hangs down behind and on each side to the
ground, or nearly so, and almost entirely envelops the person; the two
ends being held so as nearly to meet in front. Thus it conceals every
other part of the dress excepting a small portion of a very loose gown
(which is another of the articles of walking or riding apparel), and the
face-veil. It is now generally made of white calico, but a similar
covering of black silk for the married, and of white silk for the
unmarried, is now worn by females of the higher and middle classes, and
is called a "abarah."

It appears that the kind of face-veil mentioned in the same passage (in
Arabic, "inaa,") is a piece of muslin, about a yard or more in length,
and somewhat less in width, a portion of which is placed over the head,
beneath the izar, the rest hanging down in front, to the waist, or
thereabout, and entirely concealing the face. I have often seen Arab
women, particularly those of the Wahhabees, wearing veils of this kind
composed of printed muslin, completely concealing their features, yet of
sufficiently loose fabric to admit of their seeing their way. But the
more common kind of Arab face-veil is a long strip of white muslin, or
of a kind of black crape, covering the whole of the face excepting the
eyes, and reaching nearly to the feet. It is suspended at the top by a
narrow band, which passes up the forehead, and which is sewed, as are
also the two upper corners of the veil, to a band that is tied round the
head. This veil is called "buro'." The black kind is often ornamented
with gold coins, false pearls, &c., attached to the upper part. It is
not so genteel as the white veil, unless for a lady in mourning.

NOTE 3. "El-Moil" is the name of the city which Europeans commonly call
"Mosul," "Mosoul," &c.; a city long famous for its fine stuffs. Hence
our word "muslin," often termed, in Arabic, "Moilee," signifying, "of
the manufacture of El-Moil."

NOTE 4. The wine is mentioned in the Calcutta edition of the first two
hundred nights, but not in the edition of Cairo. The lady went to a
Christian to purchase her wine because Muslims are not allowed to sell
it.

NOTE 5. The "'Othmanee quinces" I suppose to be a kind so called after
some person named 'Othman who introduced it, or was famous for its
culture. The term "Sulanee," applied to the citrons afterwards
mentioned, signifies "imperial."

NOTE 6. A list of these sweets is given in my original, but I have
thought it better to omit the names.

NOTE 7. The "willow-flower-water" is prepared from the sweet-scented
flowers of the Oriental willow, called "ban" and "khilaf" or "khalaf;" a
twig of which is, among the Arabs, a favourite emblem of a graceful
female.

NOTE 8.--_On the Vessels used for Sprinkling and Perfuming._ The
sprinkling-bottle, here called "mirashsh," is more commonly called
"umum," and has been alluded to in a former note, as having a
spherical or wide body, and a long and narrow neck. It is generally
about eight inches high, and of plain or gilt silver, or of fine brass,
or china, or glass; and has a cover pierced with a small hole. This
vessel is used in the houses of the rich to sprinkle a guest or visiter,
before he rises to take his leave, with rose-water; after which
ceremony, a page or servant presents to him a kind of censer, called
"mibkharah," which is generally of one or other of the metals above
mentioned, and about the same height as the umum; and he wafts the
smoke which rises from it towards his face, beard, &c., with the right
hand. The body of the mibkharah, the form of which is nearly globular,
surmounts a stem rising from the centre of a small circular tray; the
upper half is a cover pierced with apertures for the escape of the
smoke; and the lower half, in which some burning charcoal is placed, is
lined, or half filled, with gypsum-plaster. Aloes-wood, previously
moistened, or some other odoriferous substance, is placed upon the
burning coals; and sometimes, in the houses of very wealthy persons,
ambergris is used.

NOTE 9. This description of the outer door of a house in Baghdad is an
obvious absurdity; but none of the copies of the original to which I
have access authorizes my substituting "gilt" for "plated with gold;"
all here agreeing in the use of words which have the latter sense.

NOTE 10. In their eagerness to obtain the earliest possible sight of the
new moon which marks the period of the commencement of the Ramaan, lest
they should not begin their fast as soon as the law requires, the
Muslims often see the crescent one night earlier in this than in any
other month. The comparison of an eyebrow to the new moon of Ramaan
expresses, therefore, its extreme thinness, as well as its arched form.
To reduce its natural thickness, and to give it this form, scissors are
often used.

NOTE 11. "The seal of Suleyman" is a name given by the Arabs to a
six-pointed star formed by two equilateral triangles intersecting each
other, and to the flower which we, also, call "Solomon's seal." I fear
that the reader will not consider the comparison very apposite, unless
the allusion be to a beautiful red berry which, I am informed, is borne
by the flower here mentioned.

NOTE 12.--_Description of Apartments in Arab Houses._ Most of the
descriptions of interior domestic architecture which occur in the
present work, I may aptly illustrate by availing myself of observations
made in Cairo. In the houses of persons of the higher and middle classes
in this city, the different apartments generally resemble each other in
several respects, and are similarly furnished. The greater portion of
the floor is elevated about half a foot, or somewhat more, above the
rest. The higher portion is called "leewan" (a corruption of
"el-eewan"), and the lower, "dura'ah," from the Persian "dar-gah." When
there is but one leewan, the dura'ah occupies the lower end, extending
from the door to the opposite wall. In a handsome house, it is usually
paved with white and black marble, and little pieces of red tile, inlaid
in tasteful and complicated patterns; and if the room is on the
ground-floor, and sometimes in other cases, it has, in the centre, a
fountain which plays into a small, shallow pool, lined with coloured
marbles, &c., like the surrounding pavement. The shoes, or slippers, are
left upon the dura'ah previously to stepping upon the leewan. The
latter is generally paved with common stone, and covered with a mat in
summer, and a carpet over this in winter; and a mattress and cushions
are placed against each of its three walls, composing what is called a
"deewan," or divan. The mattress, which is commonly about three feet
wide, and three or four inches thick, is placed either on the floor or
on a raised frame or a slightly-elevated pavement; and the cushions,
which are usually of a length equal to the width of the mattress, and of
a height equal to half that measure, lean against the wall. Both
mattresses and cushions are stuffed with cotton, and are covered with
printed calico, cloth, or some more expensive stuff. The deewan which
extends along the upper end of the leewan is called the "adr," and is
the most honourable: and the chief place on this seat is the corner
which is to the right of a person facing this end of the room; the other
corner is the next in point of honour; and the intermediate places on
the same deewan are more honourable than those on the two side-deewans.
To a superior, and often to an equal, the master or mistress yields the
chief place. The corners are often furnished with an additional
mattress, of a square form, just large enough for one person, placed
upon the other mattress, and with two additional (but smaller) cushions
to recline against. The walls are, for the most part, plastered and
white-washed, and generally have two or more shallow cupboards, the
doors of which, as well as those of the apartments, are fancifully
constructed with small panels. The windows, which are chiefly composed
of curious wooden lattice-work, serving to screen the inhabitants from
the view of persons without, as also to admit both light and air,
commonly project outwards, and are furnished with mattresses and
cushions. In many houses there are, above these, small windows of
coloured glass, representing bunches of flowers, &c. The ceiling is of
wood, and certain portions of it, which are carved, or otherwise
ornamented by fanciful carpentry, are usually painted with bright
colours, such as red, green, and blue, and sometimes varied with
gilding; but the greater part of the wood-work is generally left
unpainted.

The word in the original text which I translate "saloon," is "a'ah."
This term is applied to a large and lofty apartment, commonly having two
leewans, on opposite sides of the dura'ah. One of these is, in most
instances, larger than the other, and is held to be the more honourable
part. Some a'ahs, containing three leewans, one of these being opposite
the entrance, or four leewans composing the form of a cross with the
dura'ah in the centre, communicate with small chambers or closets, or
have elevated recesses which are furnished in the same manner as the
leewans. That part of the roof which is over the dura'ah rises above
the rest, sometimes to nearly twice the height of the latter, and is
generally surmounted by a lantern of wooden lattice-work to admit the
air.

NOTE 13. In the Cairo edition, the couch is described as being in the
_midst_ of the saloon; but this is inconsistent with what follows.

NOTE 14.--_Of_ Babil, _and the Angels_ Haroot _and_ Maroot. Babil, or
Babel, is regarded by the Muslims as the fountain-head of the science of
magic, which was, and, as most think, still is, taught there to mankind
by two fallen angels, named Haroot and Maroot, who are there
suspended by the feet in a great pit closed by a mass of rock.
According to the account of them generally received as correct, these
two angels, in consequence of their want of compassion for the frailties
of mankind, were rendered, by God, susceptible of human passions, and
sent down upon the earth to be tempted: they both sinned; and, being
permitted to choose whether they would be punished in this life or in
the other, chose the former; but they were sent down not merely to
_experience_ temptation, being also appointed to tempt others by means
of their knowledge of magic; though it appears that they were commanded
not to teach this art to any man "until they had said, Verily we are a
temptation; therefore, be not an unbeliever."--The celebrated
traditionist Mujahid is related to have visited them, under the guidance
of a Jew. Having removed the mass of rock from the mouth of the pit, or
well, they entered. Mujahid had been previously charged by the Jew not
to mention the name of God in their presence; but when he beheld them,
resembling in size two huge mountains, and suspended upside-down, with
irons attached to their necks and knees, he could not refrain from
uttering the forbidden name; whereupon the two angels became so
violently agitated that they almost broke the irons which confined them,
and Mujahid and his guide fled back in consternation.

NOTE 15. The meaning conveyed by this comparison is "tall and slender."

NOTE 16. In the MS. from which the old translation was made, it appears
that this lady is called Zubeydeh (which was the name of the daughter of
Jaafar the son of El-Manoor, and wife of Er-Rasheed); the portress,
afiyeh; and the cateress, Amineh; but no names are given to them in any
of the copies of the original to which I have access.

NOTE 17. Literally, "two nufs." "Nuf," vulgarly pronounced by the
Egyptians "nu," and signifying "half," is the name of a small Egyptian
coin made of a mixture of silver and copper, and now equivalent to
something less than a quarter of a farthing; but this name was
originally given to the half-dirhems which were struck in the reign of
the Sulan El-Mu-eiyad, in the early part of the ninth century of the
Flight, or of the fifteenth of our era. In the Calcutta edition of the
first two hundred nights, and in the edition of Breslau, we read here
"two dirhems," instead of "two nufs." [The coin here mentioned still
bears the name "Mu-eiyadee," or, vulgarly, "Meiyadee." In the latest
coinage, copper has been substituted for the mixed metal. ED.]

NOTE 18. The "menareh" is the tower of a mosque, commonly called by
English writers "minaret," which generally rises from a square base.

NOTE 19. It is a common custom in the East to seal the doors of
store-houses with a lump of clay, lest the lock should be picked.

NOTE 20. I here deviate a little from the Cairo edition, in which the
cateress is described as having drunk three cups of wine successively
before she handed any to her sisters. My reason for this will presently
be seen.

NOTE 21. Thus in two editions. In the Cairo edition, "tukellimuhu" is
put for "telkumuhu."

NOTE 22. _On Wine, Fruits, Flowers, and Music, in Illustration of Arab
Carousals._ I here pass over an extremely objectionable scene, which, it
is to be hoped, would convey a very erroneous idea of the manners of
Arab _ladies_; though I have witnessed, at private festivities in Cairo,
abominable scenes, of which ladies, screened behind lattices, were
spectators. Can the same be said with respect to the previous carousal?
This is a question which cannot be answered in a few words.

The prohibition of wine, or, rather, of fermented and intoxicating
liquors, being one of the most remarkable and important points of the
Mohammadan religion, it might be imagined that the frequent stories in
this work, describing parties of Muslims as habitually indulging in the
use of forbidden beverages, are scandalous misrepresentations of Arab
manners and customs. There are, however, many similar anecdotes
interspersed in the works of Arab historians, which (though many of them
are probably untrue in their application to particular individuals)
could not have been offered to the public by such writers if they were
not of a nature consistent with the customs of a considerable class of
the Arab nation.

In investigating this subject, it is necessary, in the first place, to
state, that there is a kind of wine which Muslims are permitted to
drink. It is properly called "nebeedh" (a name which is _now_ given to
_prohibited_ kinds of wine), and is generally prepared by putting dry
grapes, or dry dates, in water, to extract their sweetness, and
suffering the liquor to ferment slightly, until it acquires a little
sharpness or pungency. The Prophet himself was in the habit of drinking
wine of this kind, which was prepared for him in the first part of the
night; he drank it on the first and second days following; but if any
remained on the morning of the third day, he either gave it to his
servants or ordered it to be poured out upon the ground. Such
beverages have, therefore, been drunk by the strictest of his followers;
and Ibn-Khaldoon strongly argues that nebeedh thus prepared from dates
was the kind of wine used by the Khaleefehs Haroon Er-Rasheed and
El-Ma-moon, and several other eminent men, who have been commonly
accused of habitually and publicly indulging in debauches of wine
properly so called; that is, of inebriating liquors.

Nebeedh, prepared from raisins, is commonly sold in Arab towns, under
the name of "zebeeb," which signifies "raisins." This I have often drunk
in Cairo; but never could perceive that it was in the slightest degree
fermented. Other beverages, to which the name of "nebeedh" has been
applied (though, like zebeeb, no longer called by that name), are also
sold in Arab towns. The most common of these is an infusion of licorice,
and called by the name of the root, "'er-soos." The nebeedh of dates is
sold in Cairo with the dates themselves in the liquor; and in like
manner is that of figs. Under the same appellation of "nebeedh" have
been classed the different kinds of beer now commonly called "boozeh,"
which have been mentioned in former pages. Opium, hemp, &c., are now
more frequently used by the Muslims to induce intoxication or
exhilaration. The young leaves of the hemp are generally used alone, or
mixed with tobacco, for smoking; and the capsules, without the seeds,
enter into the composition of several intoxicating conserves. Some
remarks upon this subject have been inserted in a former note.

By my own experience I am but little qualified to pronounce an opinion
respecting the prevalence of drinking wine among the Arabs; for, never
drinking it myself, I had little opportunity of observing others do so
during my residence among Muslims. I judge, therefore, from the
conversations and writings of Arabs, which justify me in asserting that
the practice of drinking wine in private, and by select parties, is far
from being uncommon among modern Muslims, though certainly more so than
it was before the introduction of tobacco into the East, in the
beginning of the seventeenth century of our era; for this herb, being in
a slight degree exhilarating, and at the same time soothing, and
unattended by the injurious effects that result from wine, is a
sufficient luxury to many who, without it, would have recourse to
intoxicating beverages merely to pass away hours of idleness. The use of
coffee, too, which became common in Egypt, Syria, and other countries,
besides Arabia, a century earlier than tobacco, doubtless tended to
render the habit of drinking wine less general. That it was adopted as a
substitute for wine appears even from its name, "ahweh," an old Arabic
term for wine; whence the Turkish "ahveh," the Italian "caffe," and our
"coffee."

There is an Arabic work of some celebrity, and not of small extent,
entitled "albet el-Kumeyt," apparently written shortly before the
Arabs were in possession of the first of the above-mentioned substitutes
for wine, nearly the whole of which consists of anecdotes and verses
relating to the pleasures resulting from, or attendant upon, the use of
wine; a few pages at the end being devoted to the condemnation of this
practice, or, in other words, to prove the worthlessness of all that
precedes. Of this work I possess a copy, a quarto volume of 464 pages. I
have endeavoured to skim its cream; but found it impossible to do so
without collecting, at the same time, a considerable quantity of most
filthy scum; for it is characterised by wit and humour plentifully
interlarded with the grossest and most revolting obscenity; yet it
serves to confirm what has been above asserted. The mere existence of
such a work (and it is not the only one of the kind), written by a man
of learning, and I believe a aee, a judge, or one holding the
honourable office of a guardian of religion and morality,--written,
too, evidently with pleasure, notwithstanding his assertion to the
contrary,--is a strong argument in favour of the prevalence of the
practice which it paints in the most fascinating colours, and then
condemns. Its author terminates a chapter (the ninth), in which many
well-known persons are mentioned as having been addicted to wine, by
saying, that the Khaleefehs, Emeers, and Wezeers, so addicted, are too
numerous to name in such a work; and by relating a story of a man who
placed his own wife in pledge in the hands of a wine-merchant, after
having expended in the purchase of the forbidden liquor all the property
that he possessed. He excuses himself (in his preface) for writing this
book, by saying that he had been ordered to do so by one whom he could
not disobey; thus giving us a pretty strong proof that a great man in
his time was not ashamed of avowing his fondness for the prohibited
enjoyment. If, then, we admit the respectable authority of Ibn-Khaldoon,
and acquit of the vice of drunkenness those illustrious individuals
whose characters he vindicates, we must still regard most of the
anecdotes relating to the carousals of other persons as being not
without foundation.

One of my friends, who enjoys a high reputation, ranking among the most
distinguished of the 'Ulama of Cairo, is well known to his intimate
acquaintances as frequently indulging in the use of forbidden beverages
with a few select associates. I disturbed him and his companions by an
evening visit on one of these occasions, and was kept waiting within the
street-door while the guests quickly removed everything that would give
me any indication of the manner in which they had been employed; for the
announcement of my (assumed) name, and their knowledge of my abstemious
character, completely disconcerted them. I found them, however, in the
best humour. They had contrived, it appeared, to fill with wine a
_china_ bottle, of the kind used at that season (winter) for water; and
when any one of them asked the servant for water, this bottle was
brought to him; but when I made the same demand, my host told me that
there was a bottle of water on the sill of the window behind that part
of the deewan upon which I was seated. The evening passed away very
pleasantly, and I should not have known how unwelcome was my intrusion
had not one of the guests with whom I was intimately acquainted, in
walking part of the way home with me, explained to me the whole
occurrence. There was with us a third person, who, thinking that my
antipathy to wine was feigned, asked me to stop at his house on my way,
and take a cup of "white coffee," by which he meant brandy.

Another of my Muslim acquaintances in Cairo I frequently met at the
house of a mutual friend, where, though he was in most respects very
bigoted, he was in the habit of indulging in wine. For some time he
refrained from this gratification when I was present; but at length my
presence became so irksome to him, that he ventured to enter into an
argument with me on the subject of the prohibition. The only answer I
could give to his question, "Why is wine forbidden?"--was in the words
of the ur-an, "Because it is the source of more evil than profit."
This suited his purpose, as I intended it should; and he asked, "What
evil results from it?" I answered, "Intoxication and quarrels,
&c."--"Then," said he, "if a man take not enough to intoxicate him there
is no harm;"--and finding that I acquiesced by silence, he added, "I am
in the habit of taking a little; but never enough to intoxicate. Boy,
bring me a glass."--He was the only Muslim, however, whom I have heard
to argue against the absolute interdiction of inebriating liquors.

Histories tell us that some of the early followers of the Prophet
indulged in wine, holding the text above referred to as indecisive; and
that Moammad was at first doubtful upon this subject appears from
another text, in which his followers were told not to come to prayer
when they were drunk, until they should know what they would say;
an injunction somewhat similar to one in the Bible; but when
frequent and severe contentions resulted from their use of wine, the
following more decided condemnation of the practice was pronounced:--"O
ye who have become believers, verily wine and lots and images and
divining-arrows are an abomination of the work of the Devil; therefore,
avoid them, that ye may prosper." This law is absolute: its
violation in the smallest degree is criminal. The punishment ordained by
the law for drinking (or, according to most doctors, for even tasting)
wine or spirits, or inducing intoxication by any other means, on
ordinary occasions, is the infliction of eighty stripes in the case of a
free man, and forty in that of a slave; but if the crime be openly
committed in the course of any day of the month of Ramaan, when others
are fasting, the punishment prescribed is death!

The prohibition of wine hindered many of the Prophet's contemporaries
from embracing his religion. It is said that the famous poet El-Aasha,
who was one of them, delayed to join his cause on this account, until
death prevented him. A person passing by his tomb (at Menfooah, in
El-Yemameh), and observing that it was moist, asked the reason, and was
answered, that the young men of the place, considering him still as
their cup-companion, drank wine over his grave, and poured his cup upon
it. Yet many of the most respectable of the pagan Arabs, like
certain of the Jews and early Christians, abstained totally from wine,
from a feeling of its injurious effects upon morals, and, in their
climate, upon health; or, more especially, from the fear of being led by
it into the commission of foolish and degrading actions. Thus, eys the
son of 'Aim, being one night overcome with wine, attempted to grasp the
moon, and swore that he would not quit the spot where he stood until he
had laid hold of it: after leaping several times with the view of doing
so, he fell flat upon his face; and when he recovered his senses, and
was acquainted with the cause of his face being bruised, he made a
solemn vow to abstain from wine ever after. A similar feeling
operated upon many Muslims more than religious principle. The Khaleefeh
'Abd-El-Melik Ibn-Marwan took pleasure in the company of a slave named
Naeeb, and one day desired him to drink with him. The slave replied, "O
Prince of the Faithful, I am not related to thee, nor have I any
authority over thee, and I am of no rank or lineage: I am a black slave,
and my wit and politeness have drawn me into thy favour: how then shall
I take that which will plunder me of these two qualities; and by what
shall I then propitiate thee?" The Khaleefeh admired and excused
him.

It was the custom of many Muslim princes, as might be inferred from the
above anecdote, to admit the meanest of their dependants to participate
in their unlawful carousals when they could have no better companions;
but poets and musicians were their more common associates on these
occasions; and these two classes, and especially the latter, are in the
present day the most addicted to intoxicating liquors. Few modern Arab
musicians are so well contented with extraordinary payment and mere
sweet sherbet as with a moderate fee and plenty of wine and brandy; and
many of them deem even wine but a sorry beverage.

It was usual with the host and guests at wine-parties to wear dresses of
bright colours, red, yellow, and green; and to perfume their beards
and mustaches with civet, or to have rose-water sprinkled upon them; and
ambergris or aloes-wood, or some other odoriferous substance, placed
upon burning coals in a censer, diffused a delicious fragrance
throughout the saloon of the revels.

The wine, it appears, was rather thick; for it was necessary to strain
it: it was probably sweet, and not strong; for it was drunk in
large quantities. Frequently, perhaps, it was nebeedh of dry raisins
kept longer than the law allows. It was usually kept in a large earthen
vessel, called "denn," high, and small at the bottom, which was partly
imbedded in the earth to keep it upright. The name of this vessel is now
given to a cask of wood; but the kind above mentioned was of earth; for
it was easily broken.--A famous saint, Abu-l-oseyn En-Nooree, seeing a
vessel on the Tigris containing thirty denns belonging to the Khaleefeh
El-Moataid, and being told that they contained wine, took a boat-pole,
and broke them all, excepting one. When brought before the Khaleefeh to
answer for this action, and asked by him, "Who made thee Motesib?"
he boldly answered, "He who made thee Khaleefeh!"--and was
pardoned.--Pitch was used by the Arabs, as it was by the Greeks and
Romans, for the purpose of curing their wine; the interior of the denn
being coated with it. A smaller kind of earthen jar, or amphora,
and a bottle of leather, were also used. The wine
was transferred for the table to glass jugs, or long-spouted ewers.
These and the cups were placed upon a round embroidered cloth spread on
the floor, or upon a round tray. The latter now is in general use, and
is supported on a low stool, described in a former note, as being used
at ordinary meals. The guests sat around, reclining against pillars; or
they sat upon the deewan, and a page or slave handed the cup, having on
his right arm a richly-embroidered napkin: the person after drinking
took the end of this to wipe his lips. The cups are often described as
holding a fluid pound, or little less than an English pint; and this is
to be understood literally, or nearly so: they were commonly of cut
glass; but some were of crystal, or silver, or gold. With these and
the ewers or jugs were placed several saucers, or small dishes, of
fresh and dried fruits; and fans and fly-whisks, of the kinds
described on a former occasion, were used by the guests.

The most common and esteemed fruits in the countries inhabited by the
Arabs may here be mentioned.

The date deserves the first place. The Prophet's favourite fruits
were fresh dates and water-melons; and he ate them both
together. "Honour," said he, "your paternal aunt, the date-palm;
for she was created of the earth of which Adam was formed." It is
said that God hath given this tree as a peculiar favour to the Muslims;
that he hath decreed all the date-palms in the world to them, and they
have accordingly conquered every country in which these trees are found;
and all are said to have derived their origin from the Hejaz. The
palm-tree has several well-known properties that render it an emblem of
a human being; among which are these; that if the head be cut off, the
tree dies; and if a branch be cut off, another does not grow in its
place. Dates are preserved in a moist state by being merely pressed
together in a basket or skin, and thus prepared are called "'ajweh."
There are many varieties of this fruit. The pith or heart of the
palm is esteemed for its delicate flavour.

The water-melon, from what has been said of it above, ought to be
ranked next; and it really merits this distinction. "Whoso eateth," said
the Prophet, "a mouthful of water-melon, God writeth for him a thousand
good works, and cancelleth a thousand evil works, and raiseth him a
thousand degrees; for it came from Paradise;"--and again, "The
water-melon is food and drink, acid and alkali, and a support of life,"
&c. The varieties of this fruit are very numerous.

The banana is a delicious fruit. The Prophet pronounced the
banana-tree to be the only thing on earth that resembles a thing in
Paradise; because it bears fruit both in winter and summer.

The pomegranate is another celebrated fruit. Every pomegranate,
according to the Prophet, contains a fecundating seed from
Paradise.

The other most common and esteemed fruits are the following:--the apple,
pear, quince, apricot, peach, fig, sycamore-fig, grape, lote, jujube,
plum, walnut, almond, hazel-nut, pistachio-nut, orange, Seville-orange,
lime and lemon, citron, mulberry, olive, and sugar-cane.

Of a selection of these fruits consists the dessert which accompanies
the wine; but the table is not complete without a bunch or two of
flowers placed in the midst.

Though the Arabs are far from being remarkable for exhibiting taste in
the planning of their gardens, they are passionately fond of flowers,
and especially of the rose.--The Khaleefeh El-Mutawekkil
monopolized roses for his own enjoyment; saying, "I am the King of
Sulans, and the rose is the king of sweet-scented flowers; therefore
each of us is most worthy of the other for a companion." The rose, in
his time, was seen nowhere but in his palace: during the season of this
flower he wore rose-coloured clothes; and his carpets, &c., were
sprinkled with rose-water. A similar passion for the rose is said
to have distinguished a weaver, in the reign of El-Ma-moon. He was
constantly employed at his loom every day of the year, even during the
congregational prayers of Friday, excepting in the rose-season, when he
abandoned his work, and gave himself up to the enjoyment of wine, early
in the morning and late in the evening, loudly proclaiming his revels by
singing,--

  "The season has become pleasant! The time of the rose has come!
     Take your morning potations, as long as the rose has blossoms
     and flowers!"

When he resumed his work, he made it known by singing aloud,--

  "If my Lord prolong my life until the rose-season, I will take
     again my morning potations: but if I die before it, alas!
     for the loss of the rose and wine!
  "I implore the God of the supreme throne, whose glory be extolled,
     that my heart may continually enjoy the evening potations
     to the day of resurrection."

--The Khaleefeh was so amused with the humour of this man, that he
granted him an annual pension of ten thousand dirhems to enable him to
enjoy himself amply on these occasions.--Another anecdote may be
added to shew the estimation of the rose in the mind of an Arab. It is
said that Row Ibn-atim, the governor of the province of Northern
Africa, was sitting one day, with a female slave, in an apartment of his
palace, when a eunuch brought him a jar full of red and white roses,
which a man had offered as a present. He ordered the eunuch to fill the
jar with silver in return; but his concubine said, "O my lord, thou hast
not acted equitably towards the man; for his present to thee is of two
colours, red and white." The Emeer replied, "Thou hast said truly;" and
gave orders to fill the jar for him with silver and gold (dirhems and
deenars) intermixed.--Some persons preserve roses during the whole
of the year, in the following manner. They take a number of rose-buds,
and fill with them a new earthen jar, and, after closing its mouth with
mud, so as to render it impervious to the air, bury it in the earth.
Whenever they want a few roses, they take out some of these buds, which
they find unaltered, sprinkle a little water upon them, and leave them
for a short time in the air, when they open, and appear as if just
gathered.--The rose is even a subject of miracles. It is related by
Ibn-uteybeh, that there grows in India a kind of rose upon the leaves
of which is inscribed, "There is no deity but God." But I find a
more particular account of this miraculous rose. A person, who professed
to have seen it, said, "I went into India, and I saw, at one of its
towns, a large rose, sweet-scented, upon which was inscribed, in white
characters, 'There is no deity but God; Moammad is God's apostle:
Aboo-Bekr is the very veracious: 'Omar is the discriminator;' and I
doubted of this, whether it had been done by art; so I took one of the
blossoms not yet opened, and in it was the same inscription; and there
were many of the same kind there. The people of that place worshipped
stones, and knew not God, to whom be ascribed might and
glory."--Roses are announced for sale in the streets of Cairo by
the cry of "The rose was a thorn: from the sweat of the Prophet it
blossomed!" in allusion to a miracle recorded of Moammad. "When I was
taken up into heaven," said the Prophet, "some of my sweat fell upon the
earth, and from it sprang the rose; and whoever would smell my scent,
let him smell the rose." In another tradition it is said, "The white
rose was created from my sweat on the night of the Mearaj; and the
red rose, from the sweat of Jebraeel; and the yellow rose, from the
sweat of El-Bura."--The Persians take especial delight in roses;
sometimes spreading them as carpets or beds on which to sit or recline
in their revellings.

But there is a flower pronounced more excellent than the rose; that of
the Egyptian privet, or Lawsonia inermis. Moammad said, "The chief
of the sweet-scented flowers of this world and of the next is the
faghiyeh;" and this was his favourite flower. I approve of his
taste; for this flower, which grows in clusters somewhat like those of
the lilac, has a most delicious fragrance. But, on account of
discrepancies in different traditions, a Muslim may, with a clear
conscience, prefer either of the two flowers next mentioned.

The Prophet said of the violet, "The excellence of the extract of
violets, above all other extracts, is as the excellence of me above all
the rest of the creation: it is cold in summer and hot in winter:" and,
in another tradition, "The excellence of the violet is as the excellence
of El-Islam above all other religions." A delicious sherbet is made
of a conserve of sugar and violet-flowers.

The myrtle is the rival of the violet. "Adam," said the Prophet,
"fell down from Paradise with three things; the myrtle, which is the
chief of sweet-scented flowers in this world; an ear of wheat, which is
the chief of all kinds of food in this world; and pressed dates, which
are the chief of the fruits of this world."

The anemone was monopolized for his own enjoyment by Noaman
Ibn-El-Mundhir (King of El-eereh, and contemporary of Moammad), as the
rose was afterwards by El-Mutawekkil.

Another flower much admired and celebrated in the East is the
gilliflower. There are three principal kinds; the most esteemed is
the yellow, or golden-coloured, which has a delicious scent both by
night and day; the next, the purple, and other dark kinds, which have a
scent only in the night; the least esteemed, the white, which has no
scent. The yellow gilliflower is an emblem of a neglected lover.

The narcissus is very highly esteemed. Galen says, "He who has two
cakes of bread, let him dispose of one of them for some flowers of the
narcissus; for bread is the food of the body, and the narcissus is the
food of the soul." Hippocrates, too, gave a similar opinion.

The following flowers complete the list of those celebrated as most
appropriate to add to the delights of wine:--the jasmine, eglantine,
Seville-orange-flower, lily, sweet-basil, wild thyme, buphthalmum,
chamomile, nenuphar, lotus, pomegranate-flower, poppy, ketmia, crocus or
saffron, safflower, flax, the blossoms of different kinds of bean, and
those of the almond.

A sprig of Oriental willow adds much to the charms of a bunch of
flowers, being the favourite symbol of a graceful female.

But I have not yet mentioned all that contributes to the pleasures of an
Eastern carousal. For the juice of the grape is not fully relished
without melodious sounds. "Wine is as the body; music, as the soul; and
joy is their offspring." All the five senses should be gratified.
For this reason, an Arab toper, who had nothing, it appears, but wine to
enjoy, exclaimed,--

  "Ho! give me wine to drink; and tell me, 'This is wine.'"

For, on drinking, his sight and smell and taste and touch would all be
affected; but it was desirable that his hearing should also be
pleased.

Music was condemned by the Prophet almost as severely as wine. "Singing
and hearing songs," said he, "cause hypocrisy to grow in the heart, like
as water promoteth the growth of corn:"--and musical instruments he
declared to be among the most powerful means by which the Devil seduces
man. An instrument of music is the Devil's mueddin, serving to call men
to his worship, as stated in a former note. Of the hypocrisy of those
attached to music, the following anecdote presents an instance:--A
drunken young man with a lute in his hand was brought one night before
the Khaleefeh 'Abd-El-Melik the son of Marwan, who, pointing to the
instrument, asked what it was, and what was its use. The youth made no
answer; so he asked those around him; but they also remained silent,
till one, more bold than the rest, said, "O Prince of the Faithful,
this is a lute: it is made by taking some wood of the pistachio-tree,
and cutting it into thin pieces, and glueing these together, and then
attaching over them these chords, which, when a beautiful girl touches
them, send forth sounds more pleasant than those of rain falling upon a
desert land; and my wife is separated from me by a triple divorce if
every one in this council is not acquainted with it, and doth not know
it as well as I do, and thou the first of them, O Prince of the
Faithful." The Khaleefeh laughed, and ordered that the young man should
be discharged.

The latter saying of the Prophet, respecting the Devil, suggests to me
the insertion of another anecdote, related of himself by Ibraheem
El-Moilee, the father of Is-a; both of whom were very celebrated
musicians. I give a translation of it somewhat abridged.--"I asked
Er-Rasheed," says Ibraheem, "to grant me permission to spend a day at
home with my female slaves and brothers; and he gave me two thousand
deenars, and appointed the next Saturday for this purpose. I caused the
meats and wine and other necessaries to be prepared, and ordered the
chamberlain to close the door, and admit no one: but while I was
sitting, with my attendants standing in the form of a curved line before
me, there entered, and approached me, a sheykh, reverend and dignified
and comely in appearance, wearing short khuffs, and two soft gowns,
with a alensuweh upon his head, and in his hand a silver-headed
staff; and sweet odours were diffused from his clothes. I was enraged
with the chamberlain for admitting him; but on his saluting me in a very
courteous manner, I returned his salutation, and desired him to sit
down. He then began to repeat to me stories, tales of war, and poetry;
so that my anger was appeased, and it appeared to me that my servants
had not presumed to admit him until acquainted with his politeness and
courteousness; I therefore said to him, 'Hast thou any inclination for
meat?' He answered, 'I have no want of it.'--'And the wine?' said I. He
replied, 'Yes.' So I drank a large cupful, and he did the same, and then
said to me, 'O Ibraheem, wilt thou let us hear some specimen of thy art
in which thou hast excelled the people of thy profession?' I was angry
at his words; but I made light of the matter, and, having taken the lute
and tuned it, I played and sang; whereupon he said, 'Thou hast performed
well, O Ibraheem.' I became more enraged, and said within myself, 'He is
not content with coming hither without permission, and asking me to
sing, but he calls me by my name, and proves himself unworthy of my
conversation.' He then said, 'Wilt thou let us hear more? If so, we will
requite thee.' And I took the lute, and sang, using my utmost care, on
account of his saying, 'we will requite thee.' He was moved with
delight, and said, 'Thou hast performed well, O my master
Ibraheem:'--adding, 'Wilt thou permit thy slave to sing?' I answered,
'As thou pleasest:'--but thinking lightly of his sense to sing after me.
He took the lute, and tuned it; and, by Allah! I imagined that the lute
spoke in his hands with an eloquent Arab tongue. He proceeded to sing
some verses commencing,--

  'My heart is wounded! Who will give me, for it, a heart without
     a wound?'

The narrator continues by saying, that he was struck dumb and motionless
with ecstasy; and that the strange sheykh, after having played and sung
again, and taught him an enchanting air (with which he afterwards
enraptured his patron, the Khaleefeh), vanished. Ibraheem, in alarm,
seized his sword; and was the more amazed when he found that the porter
had not seen the stranger enter or leave the house; but he heard his
voice again, outside, telling him that he was Aboo-Murrah (the
Devil).--Two other anecdotes of a similar kind are related in the
work from which the above is taken.

Ibraheem El-Moilee, his son Is-a, and Mukhari (a pupil of the
former), were especially celebrated among the Arab musicians, and among
the distinguished men of the reign of Haroon Er-Rasheed. Is-a
El-Moilee relates, of his father Ibraheem, that when Er-Rasheed took
him into his service, he gave him a hundred and fifty thousand dirhems,
and allotted him a monthly pension of ten thousand dirhems, besides
occasional presents [one of which is mentioned as amounting to a hundred
thousand dirhems for a single song], and the produce of his (Ibraheem's)
farms: he had food constantly prepared for him; three sheep every day
for his kitchen, besides birds; three thousand dirhems were allowed him
for fruits, perfumes, &c., every month, and a thousand dirhems for his
clothing; "and with all this," says his son, "he died without leaving
more than three thousand deenars, a sum not equal to his debts, which I
paid after his death."--Ibraheem was of Persian origin, and of a
high family. He was commonly called the Nedeem (or cup-companion), being
Er-Rasheed's favourite companion at the wine-table; and his son, who
enjoyed the like distinction with El-Ma-moon, received the same
appellation, as well as that of "Son of the Nedeem." Ibraheem was the
most famous musician of his time, at least till his son attained
celebrity.

Is-a El-Moilee was especially famous as a musician; but he was also a
good poet, accomplished in general literature, and endowed with great
wit. He was honoured above all other persons in the pay of El-Ma-moon,
and enjoyed a long life; but for many years before his death he was
blind.

Mukhari appears to have rivalled his master Ibraheem. The latter, he
relates, took him to perform before Er-Rasheed, who used to have a
curtain suspended between him and the musicians. "Others," he says,
"sang, and he was unmoved; but when I sang, he came forth from behind
the curtain, and exclaimed, 'Young man, hither!' and he seated me upon
the sereer 
The following anecdote (which I abridge a little in translation) shews
his excellence in the art which he professed, and the effect of melody
on an Arab:--"After drinking with the Khaleefeh a whole night, I
asked his permission," says he, "to take the air in the Ruafeh,
which he granted; and while I was walking there, I saw a damsel who
appeared as if the rising sun beamed from her face. She had a basket,
and I followed her. She stopped at a fruiterer's, and bought some fruit;
and observing that I was following her, she looked back and abused me
several times; but still I followed her until she arrived at a great
door, after having filled her basket with fruits and flowers and similar
things. When she had entered, and the door was closed behind her, I sat
down opposite to it, deprived of my reason by her beauty; and knew that
there must be in the house a wine-party. The sun went down upon me while
I sat there; and at length there came two handsome young men on asses,
and they knocked at the door, and when they were admitted I entered with
them; the master of the house thinking that I was their companion, and
they imagining that I was one of his friends. A repast was brought, and
we ate, and washed our hands, and were perfumed. The master of the house
then said to the two young men, 'Have ye any desire that I should call
such a one?' (mentioning a female name). They answered, 'If thou wilt
grant us the favour, well:'--so he called for her, and she came, and lo,
she was the maiden whom I had seen before, and who had abused me. A
servant-maid preceded her, bearing her lute, which she placed in her
lap. Wine was then brought, and she sang while we drank, and shook with
delight. 'Whose air is that?' they asked. She answered, 'Seedee
Mukhari's.' She then sang another air, which, also, she said was mine;
while they drank by pints; she looking aside and doubtfully at me until
I lost my patience, and called out to her to do her best: but in
attempting to do so, singing a third air, she overstrained her voice,
and I said, 'Thou hast made a mistake:'--upon which she threw the lute
from her lap, in anger, so that she nearly broke it; saying, 'Take it
thyself, and let us hear thee.' I answered, 'Well;' and, having taken it
and tuned it perfectly, sang the first of the airs which she had sung
before me; whereupon all of them sprang upon their feet, and kissed my
head. I then sang the second air, and the third; and their reason almost
fled, from ecstasy. The master of the house, after asking his guests,
and being told by them that they knew me not, came to me, and, kissing
my hand, said, 'By Allah, my master, who art thou?' I answered, 'By
Allah, I am the singer Mukhari.'--'And for what purpose,' said he,
kissing both my hands, 'camest thou hither?' I replied, 'As a
spunger;'--and related what had happened with respect to the maiden:
whereupon he looked towards his two companions, and said to them, 'Tell
me, by Allah, do ye not know that I gave for that girl thirty thousand
dirhems, and have refused to sell her?' They answered, 'It is so.' Then
said he, 'I take you as witnesses that I have given her to him.'--'And
we,' said the two friends, 'will pay thee two-thirds of her price.' So
he put me in possession of the girl, and in the evening, when I
departed, he presented me also with rich dresses and other gifts, with
all of which I went away; and as I passed the places where the maiden
had abused me, I said to her, 'Repeat thy words to me;' but she could
not, for shame. Holding the girl's hand, I went with her immediately to
the Khaleefeh, whom I found in anger at my long absence; but when I
related my story to him he was surprised, and laughed, and ordered that
the master of the house and his two friends should be brought before
him, that he might requite them: to the former he gave forty thousand
dirhems; to each of his two friends, thirty thousand; and to me, a
hundred thousand; and I kissed his feet, and departed."

It is particularly necessary for the Arab musician, that he have a
retentive memory, well stocked with choice pieces of poetry, and with
facetious or pleasant anecdotes, interspersed with songs; and that he
have a ready wit, aided by dramatic talent, to employ these materials
with good effect. If, to such qualifications, he adds fair attainments
in the difficult rules of grammar, a degree of eloquence, comic humour,
and good temper, and is not surpassed by many in his art, he is sure to
be a general favourite. Very few Muslims of the higher classes have
condescended to study music, because they would have been despised by
their inferiors for doing so; or because they themselves have despised
or condemned the art. Ibraheem, the son of the Khaleefeh El-Mahdee, and
competitor of El-Ma-moon, was a remarkable exception: he is said to have
been an excellent musician, and a good singer.

In the houses of the wealthy, the vocal and instrumental performers were
usually (as is the case in many houses in the present age) domestic
female slaves, well instructed in their art by hired male or female
professors. In the work before us, these slaves are commonly described
as standing or sitting unveiled in the presence of male guests; but,
from several descriptions of musical entertainments that I have met with
in Arabic works, it appears that, according to the more approved custom
in respectable society, they were concealed on such occasions behind a
curtain, which generally closed the front of an elevated recess. In all
the houses of wealthy Arabs that I have entered, one or each of the
larger saloons has an elevated closet, the front of which is closed by a
screen of wooden lattice-work, to serve as an orchestra for the domestic
or hired female singers and instrumental performers. Of the hired
performers, any further mention is not here required; but of the slaves
and free ladies who supplied their place, a few words must be added, as
very necessary to illustrate the preceding and many other tales in this
work.

To a person acquainted with modern Arabian manners, it must appear
inconsistent with truth to describe such females as exposing their
faces before strange men, unless he can discover in sober histories some
evidence of their having been less strict in this respect than the
generality of Arab females at the present period. I find, however, a
remarkable proof that such was the case in the latter part of the ninth
century of the Flight, and the beginning of the tenth: that is, about
the end of the fifteenth century of our era. The famous historian
Es-Suyooee, who flourished at this period, in his preface to a curious
work on wedlock, written to correct the corrupt manners of his age,
says,--"Seeing that the women of this time deck themselves with the
attire of prostitutes, and walk in the soos (or market-streets), like
female warriours against the religion, and uncover their faces and hands
before men, to incline  hearts to them by evil suggestions, and
play at feasts with young men, thereby meriting the anger of the
Compassionate , and go forth to the public baths and
assemblies, with various kinds of ornaments and perfumes, and with
conceited gait; for the which they shall be congregated in Hell-fire,
for opposing the good, and on account of this their affected gait, while
to their husbands they are disobedient, behaving to them in the reverse
manner, excepting when they fear to abridge their liberty of going
abroad by such conduct; for they are like swine and apes in their
interior nature, though like daughters of Adam in their exterior
appearance; especially the women of this age; not advising their
husbands in matters of religion, but the latter erring in permitting
them to go out to every assembly; sisters of devils and demons, &c.
&c.... I have undertaken the composition of this volume." A more
convincing testimony than this, I think, cannot be required.

The lute (el-'ood) is the only instrument that is generally described as
used at the entertainments which we have been considering. Engravings of
this and other musical instruments are given in my work on the Modern
Egyptians. The Arab viol (called rabab) was commonly used by inferior
performers. (See also Note 26, below.)

The Arab music is generally of a soft and plaintive character, and
particularly that of the most refined description, which is
distinguished by a remarkable peculiarity, the division of tones into
thirds. The singer aims at distinct enunciation of the words, for this
is justly admired; and delights in a trilling style. The airs of songs
are commonly very short and simple, adapted to a single verse, or even
to a single hemistich; but in the instrumental music there is more
variety.

NOTE 23. This is often said to a person whose presence is disagreeable
to his companions.

NOTE 24.--_On the_ alenderees. In the old translation, these three
strangers are called "Calenders;" that is, "alenderees:" but in the
Calcutta edition of the first two hundred nights, and the edition of
Breslau, they are designated as "arendelees," "miserable or ridiculous
beggars;" and in that of Cairo, the term applied to them is "a'aleek,"
or, simply, "paupers," or "mendicants." Some may suppose the right
reading to be "alenderees;" for it was a custom of this order of
Darweeshes to shave their beards: they were forbidden to do so in the
year of the Flight 761, by the Sulan of Egypt (El-Melik en-Nair
El-asan); but whether they afterwards reverted to this habit, I do not
know. The order of the alenderees, however, was not founded until about
the commencement of the fifth century of the Flight, a period long
posterior to that to which the tale relates.

NOTE 25. In the edition of Cairo, they are said to have arrived from
Greece.

NOTE 26.--_On the Persian Harp._ This instrument is called in Arabic
"junk," from the Persian "chang." It has almost fallen into disuse, and
I have never seen it: I am enabled, however, to give two sketches of its
form through the kindness of the  Right Honourable Sir Gore
Ouseley, who has favoured me with drawings made from two of the most
satisfactory representations of it in his rich collection of Oriental
MSS.; the first, about 350 years old; the second 410. The number of
strings, he informs me, vary from 20 to 27.



NOTE 27.--_On the Title and Office of_ Khaleefeh. As most of our best
authors on Oriental subjects have for some years past deviated from our
old general mode of writing this title, substituting (for "Caliph")
"Khalif," "Khalifah," &c., I have taken the same liberty. It cannot be
correctly written, at the same time congenially with our language and
with its orthography in Arabic characters, otherwise than "Khaleefeh" or
"Khaleefah;" and of these two modes I adopt the one which agrees with
the manner in which the title is most generally pronounced by the Arabs.
The meaning of this title is "Successor," or "Vicar;" and it was
originally given to the universal sovereigns of the Muslim Arabs, as
signifying "Successor of the Prophet;" but afterwards, in a more exalted
sense, as "Vicar of God:" the Khaleefeh being the head of the religion
as well as the supreme political governor, or at least arrogating to
himself the right to possess such supremacy, throughout the whole Muslim
world. [The last of the Khaleefehs died in Egypt shortly after the
Turkish conquest of that country, or in the year of the Flight, 950.
After the overthrow of the house of El-'Abbas by Hulagu, certain of its
members obtained an asylum at the court of the Memlook Sulans, and
continued the line of the Khaleefehs, with spiritual, but no temporal,
authority until it ceased in the person of El-Mutawekkil, who delegated
his office to the Sulan Seleem I.; it is consequently held by the
Sulan of Turkey. The Emperors of Morocco, being descendants of the
Prophet, also claim and receive from their subjects the title of
Khaleefeh.

NOTE 28. The stories in which this justly-celebrated man is mentioned
will, I think, be more agreeable to those readers who are unacquainted
with his history, of which, therefore, I shall say nothing.

NOTE 29. Mesroor was a black eunuch, and a favourite servant of
Er-Rasheed. The name signifies "happy."

NOTE 30. "abareeyeh" is the modern name for Tiberias.

NOTE 31.--_Description_ of Khans, or Wekalehs. A Khan is a building
chiefly designed for the accommodation of merchants, and for the
reception of their goods. In Egypt, a building of this kind is generally
called a Wekaleh. I have described it, in a former work, as surrounding
a square or oblong court, and having, on the ground-floor, vaulted
magazines for merchandise, which face the court, and are sometimes used
as shops. Above these are generally lodgings, which are entered from a
gallery extending along each of the four sides of the court; or, in the
place of these lodgings, there are other magazines: and in many khans or
wekalehs which have apartments designed as lodgings, these apartments
are used as magazines. In general, the building has only one common
entrance; the door of which is closed at night, and kept by a porter.

NOTE 32. It is customary for a guest or visiter to ask permission of the
host, or master of the house, before taking his departure. A common form
of speech used on this occasion is, "With your permission, I rise."

NOTE 33. Many Muslims perform the pilgrimage with the view of expiating
their offences, and, at the Kaabeh, or at the tomb of the Prophet, make
a vow to abstain from any glaring infringement of the law of which they
may before have been guilty.

NOTE 34. I learn, from a marginal note in my copy of the original, by
the sheykh Moammad E-Tanawee, that these verses are the composition
of Ibn-Sahl El-Ishbee-lee. Three concluding verses of the same ode, and
a second poetical quotation immediately following, I have passed over.

NOTE 35. In the original there are some errors in this part of the
story, which the sequel requires me to correct. The cateress is
described as having sung three successive songs, accompanying them with
her lute. After the first song, the mistress of the house is said to
have been affected in the manner described in the translation, and to
have exposed to view the marks of beating. The second lady (namely, the
portress) is represented as similarly excited by the second song; and
the third lady (the cateress herself), by the third song. The last also
is said to have exhibited upon her person those marks which, as the
sequel shews, were borne by the second.

NOTE 36. The "mira'ah," vulgarly called "mara'ah," is a portion of the
thicker end of a palm-branch stripped of the leaves. It is often used to
beat a person in sport; but in this case, two or three splits are
usually made in the thicker part of it, to increase the sound of the
blows.

NOTE 37. In the original, "the portress." See Note 35, above.

NOTE 38. Perhaps it is needless to explain that the wish here expressed,
for a protractive trial on the day of judgment, is occasioned by the
longing for reunion, and the fear of separation after that day. The
Muslims usually pray for an easy (and, consequently, a short) reckoning.

NOTE 39. I have omitted the third song of the cateress, and the
description of its effects, mentioned in Note 35.

NOTE 40. See Note 47 to Chapter II.

NOTE 41. It seems to be implied that the lady discovered her guests,
notwithstanding their disguise, to be persons of rank.

NOTE 42. I read "fuarau aajam" for "fuarau-l-hojjam:" the former,
carelessly written (in Arabic characters), might easily be mistaken for
the latter.

NOTE 43. This phrase is used to signify "Recover thy senses;" alluding
to a person's drawing his hand over his head or face after a sleep or
fit.

NOTE 44. The burial-grounds of Eastern cities are generally so
extensive, that, with the varied structures which they contain, they may
aptly be called "Cities of the Dead." It was with difficulty that I
recognised the tomb of the lamented Burckhardt, in the great cemetery on
the north of Cairo, even after I had carefully noticed its place on a
former visit.

NOTE 45. I have ventured to make a slight alteration here; but it is one
which does not in the least affect the consistency of the tale. Marriage
with a foster-sister is as expressly forbidden by the Mohammadan law as
that with a natural sister.

NOTE 46. "The Truth" is one of the ninety-nine names or epithets of God.

NOTE 47. Many an Arab would rather risk the loss of his head than part
with his beard; for the latter is regarded by almost all Muslims with a
superstitious respect; and to shave it off, at least after it has been
suffered to grow for many days, they consider as sinful: this, however,
is sometimes done by religious mendicants, as it is also by some of
those persons who seek, or enjoy, the reputation of sanctity, and who
are, or pretend to be, insane.

NOTE 48. By "the seven readings," we are to understand seven slightly
different modes of reading the ur-an, seldom differing essentially as
to the sense.

NOTE 49. Astrology (not astronomy) is here meant. Though a forbidden
science, it is studied by many Muslims.

NOTE 50. A misplaced diacritical point occasions a wrong reading here,
in the original, which I have corrected.

NOTE 51. The Mohammadan law requires that every man be acquainted with
some art or occupation by which he may, in case of necessity, at least
be able to obtain the means of supporting himself and such of his family
as are dependant upon him, and of fulfilling all his religious as well
as moral duties. Hence it has been a common custom of Muslim princes, in
every age, to learn some useful art; and many of them have distinguished
themselves by displaying exquisite skill in the work of their hands, and
especially in caligraphy, of which the Orientals in general are great
admirers.

NOTE 52. The 'Efreet (as we are told in some editions of the original)
had taken this lady against the consent of his family, and therefore
could not more frequently visit her.

NOTE 53. The term "ubbeh" is often applied to a closet or small chamber
adjoining a saloon; and in this sense it appears to be here used.

NOTE 54.--_On Sherbets._ The Arabs have various kinds of sherbets, or
sweet drinks; the most common of which is merely sugar and water, made
very sweet. The most esteemed kind is prepared from a hard conserve of
violets, made by pounding violet-flowers, and then boiling them with
sugar. Other kinds are prepared from conserves of fruits, &c. The
sherbet is served in covered glass cups, containing from two-thirds to
three-quarters of an English pint; the same which I have described in a
former note as used for wine. These are placed on a round tray, and
covered with a round piece of embroidered silk, or cloth of gold; and on
the right arm of the person who presents the sherbet, is hung a long
napkin with a deep embroidered border of gold and coloured silks at each
end, which is ostensibly offered for the purpose of wiping the lips
after drinking, though the lips are scarcely touched with it.

NOTE 55. The Arabs are very fond of having their feet, and especially
the soles, slowly rubbed with the hand; and this operation, which is one
of the services commonly required of a wife or female slave, is a usual
mode of waking a person.

NOTE 56. Here, and again in the same and a subsequent sentence, for
"kheiyaeen," I read "aabeen." In the Breslau edition, "khaabeen"
is put for the latter. The right reading is obvious.

NOTE 57. Falsehood was _commended_ by the Prophet when it tended to
reconcile persons at enmity with each other, and when practised in order
to please one's wife, or to obtain any advantage in a war with infidels,
though strongly reprobated in other cases.

NOTE 58. Four verses here inserted in the original appear to me to be a
corruption of a couplet which better expresses the same meaning, and
which I have therefore translated in the place of the former. As the
lines to which I allude are particularly pleasing, I may perhaps be
excused if I here introduce the original words, which are as follow:--

  "Isharatuna fi-l-obbi remzu 'oyoonina: wa-kullu lebeebin
     bi-l-isharati yefhamu,
  awajibuna tei-l-awaija beynena: fa-nanu sukootun wa-l-hawa
     yetekellemu."

NOTE 59. This is not meant to disparage the individual lady here
mentioned, but is a saying of the Prophet applied to the sex in general.

NOTE 60. In the edition of Cairo, this story is omitted. I translate it
from the Calcutta edition of the first two hundred nights.

NOTE 61. "Faeer" (which signifies "poor," and is particularly used in
the sense of "poor in the sight of God," or rather, "in need of the
mercy of God") is an appellation commonly given to poor persons who
especially occupy themselves in religious exercises.

NOTE 62. The performances called "zikrs" will be briefly described
towards the close of the next note.

NOTE 63.--_On Muslin Saints, or Devotees._ The tale of the Envied
Sheykh, and several other stories in this work, require that the reader
should be acquainted with the remarkable opinions which the Arabs
entertain with respect to the offices and supernatural powers of their
saints. Such matters form an important part of the mysteries of the
Darweeshes, and are but imperfectly known to the generality of Muslims.

The distinguished individuals above mentioned are known by the common
appellation of "Welees," or particular favourites of God. The more
eminent among them compose a mysterious hierarchical body, whose
government respects the whole human race, infidels as well as believers;
but whose power is often exercised in such a manner that the subjects
influenced by it know not from what person or persons its effects
proceed. The general governor or corypheus of these holy beings is
commonly called the "ub," which literally signifies a "pole," or an
"axis," and is metaphorically used to signify a "chief," either in a
civil or political, or in a spiritual sense. The ub of the saints is
distinguished by other appellations: he is called "ub el-Ghos," or
"---- el-Ghoth" ("the ub of Invocation for Help"), &c.; and simply
"El-Ghos." The orders under the rule of this chief are called
"'Omud (or Owtad), Akhyar, Abdal, Nujaba, and Nuaba:" I name them
according to their precedence. Perhaps to these should be added an
inferior order called "A-ab ed-Darak," which is said to mean
"Watchmen," or "Overseers." The members are not known as such to their
inferior, unenlightened fellow-creatures; and are often invisible to
them. This is more frequently the case with the ub, who, though
generally stationed at Mekkeh, on the roof of the Kaabeh, is never
visible there, nor at any of his other favourite stations or places of
resort; yet his voice is often heard at these places. Whenever he and
the saints under his authority mingle among ordinary men, they are not
distinguished by a dignified appearance, but are always humbly clad.
These, and even inferior saints, are said to perform astonishing
miracles, such as flying in the air, passing unhurt through fire,
swallowing fire, glass, &c., walking upon water, transporting themselves
in a moment of time to immense distances, and supplying themselves and
others with food in desert places. Their supernatural power they are
supposed to obtain by a life of the most exalted piety, and especially
by constant self-denial, accompanied with the most implicit reliance
upon God; by the services of good genii; and, as many believe, by the
knowledge and utterance of "the most great name" of God. A miracle
performed by a saint is distinguished by the term "karameh" from one
performed by a prophet, which is called "moajizeh."

El-Khir and Ilyas (or Elias), of whom I have before had occasion to
speak, are both believed to have been ubs, and the latter is called in
the ur-an an apostle; but it is disputed whether the former was a
prophet or merely a welee. Both are said to have drunk of the Fountain
of Life, and to be in consequence still living; and Ilyas is commonly
believed to invest the successive ubs. The similarity of the miracles
ascribed to the ubs and those performed by Elias or Elijah I have
remarked in a former work. Another miracle, reminding us of the mantle
of Elijah in the hands of his successor, may here be mentioned.--A saint
who was the ub of his time, dying at Toonis (or Tunis), left his
clothes in trust to his attendant, Moammad El-Ashwam, a native of the
neighbouring regency of Tripoli (now called arabulus), who desired to
sell these relics, but was counselled to retain them, and accordingly,
though high prices were bidden for them, made them his own by purchase.
As soon as they became his property, he was affected, we are told, with
a divine ecstasy, and endowed with miraculous powers.

Innumerable miracles are related to have been performed by Muslim
saints, and large volumes are filled with the histories of their
wonderful lives. The author of the work from which the above story is
taken, mentions, as a fact to be relied on, in an account of one of his
ancestors, that, his lamp happening to go out one night while he was
reading alone in the riwa of the Jabart (of which he was the sheykh),
in the great mosque El-Azhar, the forefinger of his right hand emitted a
light which enabled him to continue his reading until his naeeb had
trimmed and lighted another lamp.

From many stories of a similar kind that I have read, I select the
following as a fair specimen: it is related by a very celebrated saint,
Ibraheem El-Khowwa.--"I entered the desert [on pilgrimage to Mekkeh
from El-'Era], and there joined me a man having a belt round his waist,
and I said, 'Who art thou?'--He answered, 'A Christian; and I desire thy
company.' We walked together for seven days, eating nothing; after which
he said to me, 'O monk of the Muslims, produce what thou hast in the way
of refreshment; for we are hungry:' so I said, 'O my God, disgrace me
not before this infidel:' and lo, a tray, upon which were bread and
broiled meat and fresh dates and a mug of water. We ate, and continued
our journey seven days more; and I then said to him, 'O monk of the
Christians, produce what thou hast in the way of refreshment; for the
turn is come to thee:' whereupon he leaned upon his staff; and prayed;
and lo, two trays, containing double that which was on my tray. I was
confounded, and refused to eat: he urged me, saying, 'Eat;' but I did it
not. Then said he, 'Be glad; for I give thee two pieces of good news:
one of them is, that I testify that there is no deity but God, and that
Moammad is God's Apostle: the other, that I said, O God, if there be
worth in this servant, supply me with two trays:--so this is through thy
blessing.' We ate, and the man put on the dress of pilgrimage, and so
entered Mekkeh, where he remained with me a year as a student; after
which he died, and I buried him in  El-Maala." "And God,"
says the author from whom I take this story, "is all-knowing:" _i.e._ He
alone knoweth whether it be strictly true: but this is often added to
the narration of traditions resting upon high authority.--The saint
above mentioned was called "El-Khowwa" (or the maker of palm-leaf
baskets, &c.) from the following circumstance, related by himself.--"I
used," said he, "to go out of the town  and sit by a river on
the banks of which was abundance of palm-leaves; and it occurred to my
mind to make every day five baskets , and to throw them into
the river, for my amusement, as if I were obliged to do so. My time was
so passed for many days: at length, one day, I thought I would walk
after the baskets, and see whither they had gone: so I proceeded a while
along the bank of the river, and found an old woman sitting sorrowful.
On that day I had made nothing. I said to her, 'Wherefore do I see thee
sorrowful?' She answered, 'I am a widow: my husband died leaving five
daughters, and nothing to maintain them; and it is my custom to repair
every day to this river, and there come to me, upon the surface of the
water, five baskets, which I sell, and by means of them I procure food;
but to-day they have not come, and I know not what to do.' Upon hearing
this, I raised my head towards heaven, and said, 'O my God, had I known
that I had more than five children to maintain, I had laboured more
diligently!'" He then took the old woman to his house, and gave her
money and flour, and said to her, "Whenever thou wantest anything, come
hither and take what may suffice you."

An irresistible influence has often been exercised over the minds of
princes and other great men by reputed saints. Many a Muslim Monarch has
thus been incited (as the Kings of Christendom were by Peter the Hermit)
to undertake religious wars, or urged to acts of piety and charity; or
restrained from tyranny by threats of Divine vengeance to be called down
upon his head by the imprecations of a welee. 'Alee, the favourite son
of the Khaleefeh El-Ma-moon, was induced, for the sake of religion, to
flee from the splendour and luxuries of his father's court, and, after
the example of a self-denying devotee, to follow the occupation of a
porter, in a state of the most abject poverty, at El-Barah, fasting all
the day, remaining without sleep at night in a mosque, and walking
barefooted, until, under an accumulation of severe sufferings, he
prematurely ended his days, dying on a mat. The honours which he refused
to receive in life were paid to him after his death: his rank being
discovered by a ring and paper which he left, his corpse was anointed
with camphor and musk and aloes, wrapped in fine linen of Egypt, and so
conveyed to his distressed father at Baghdad.

Self-denial I have before mentioned as one of the most important means
by which to attain the dignity of a welee. A very famous saint,
Esh-Shiblee, is said to have received from his father an inheritance of
sixty millions of deenars (a sum incredible, and probably a mistake for
sixty thousand, or for sixty million dirhems), besides landed property,
and to have expended it all in charity: also, to have thrown into the
Tigris seventy hundred-weight of books, written by his own hand during a
period of twenty years.

Shah El-Karmanee, another celebrated saint, had a beautiful daughter,
whom the Sulan of his country sought in marriage. The holy man required
three days to consider his sovereign's proposal, and in the mean time
visited several mosques, in one of which he saw a young man humbly
occupied in prayer. Having waited till he had finished, he accosted him,
saying, "My son, hast thou a wife?" Being answered, "No," he said, "I
have a maiden, a virtuous devotee, who hath learned the whole of the
ur-an, and is amply endowed with beauty. Dost thou desire her?"--"Who,"
said the young man, "will marry me to such a one as thou hast described,
when I possess no more than three dirhems?"--"_I_ will marry thee to
her," answered the saint: "she is my daughter, and I am Shah the son of
Shujaa El-Karmanee: give me the dirhems that thou hast, that I may buy a
dirhem's worth of bread, and a dirhem's worth of something savoury, and
a dirhem's worth of perfume." The marriage-contract was performed; but
when the bride came to the young man, she saw a stale cake of bread
placed upon the top of his mug; upon which she put on her izar, and went
out. Her husband said, "Now I perceive that the daughter of Shah
El-Karmanee is displeased with my poverty." She answered, "I did not
withdraw from fear of poverty, but on account of the weakness of thy
faith, seeing how thou layest by a cake of bread for the morrow."

One of my friends in Cairo, Abu-l-asim of Geelan, mentioned in a former
note, entertained me with a long relation of the mortifications and
other means which he employed to attain the rank of a welee. These were
chiefly self-denial and a perfect reliance upon Providence. He left his
home in a state of voluntary destitution and complete nudity, to travel
through Persia and the surrounding countries, and yet more distant
regions if necessary, in search of a spiritual guide. For many days he
avoided the habitations of men, fasting from daybreak till sunset, and
then eating nothing but a little grass or a few leaves or wild fruits,
till by degrees he habituated himself to almost total abstinence from
every kind of nourishment. His feet, at first blistered, and cut by
sharp stones, soon became callous; and in proportion to his reduction of
food, his frame, contrary to the common course of nature, became
(according to his own account) more stout and lusty. Bronzed by the sun,
and with his black hair hanging over his shoulders (for he had abjured
the use of the razor), he presented, in his nudity, a wild and frightful
appearance; and on his first approaching a town, was surrounded and
pelted by a crowd of boys; he therefore retreated, and, after the
example of our first parents, made himself a partial covering of leaves;
and this he always after did on similar occasions; never remaining long
enough in a town for his leafy apron to wither. The abodes of mankind he
always passed at a distance, excepting when several days' fast, while
traversing an arid desert, compelled him to obtain a morsel of bread or
a cup of water from the hand of some charitable fellow-creature. One
thing that he particularly dreaded was, to receive relief from a sinful
man, or from a demon in the human form. In passing over a parched and
desolate tract, where for three days he had found nothing to eat, not
even a blade of grass, nor a spring from which to refresh his tongue, he
became overpowered with thirst, and prayed that God would send him a
messenger with a pitcher of water. "But," said he, "let the water be in
a green Baghdahee pitcher, that I may know it be from Thee, and not from
the Devil; and when I ask the bearer to give me to drink, let him pour
it over my head, that I may not too much gratify my carnal desire."--"I
looked behind me," he continued, "and saw a man bearing a green
Baghdahee pitcher of water, and said to him, 'Give me to drink;' and he
came up to me, and poured the contents over my head, and departed! By
Allah it was so!"--Rejoicing in this miracle, as a proof of his having
attained to a degree of wilayeh (or saintship), and refreshed by the
water, he continued his way over the desert, more firm than ever in his
course of self-denial, which, though imperfectly followed, had been the
means of his being thus distinguished. But the burning thirst returned
shortly after, and he felt himself at the point of sinking under it,
when he beheld before him a high hill, with a rivulet running by its
base. To the summit of this hill he determined to ascend, by way of
mortification, before he would taste the water, and this point, with
much difficulty, he reached at the close of the day. Here standing, he
saw approaching, below, a troop of horsemen, who paused at the foot of
the hill, when their chief, who was foremost, called out to him by name,
"O Abu-l-asim! O Geelanee! Come down and drink!"--but, persuaded by
this that he was Iblees with a troop of his sons, the evil Genii, he
withstood the temptation, and remained stationary until the deceiver
with his attendants had passed on, and were out of sight. The sun had
then set; his thirst had somewhat abated; and he only drank a few drops.
Continuing his wanderings in the desert, he found, upon a pebbly plain,
an old man with a long white beard, who accosted him, asking of what he
was in search. "I am seeking," he answered, "a spiritual guide; and my
heart tells me that thou art the guide I seek." "My son," said the old
man, "thou seest yonder a saint's tomb: it is a place where prayer is
answered: go thither, enter it, and seat thyself: neither eat nor drink
nor sleep; but occupy thyself solely, day and night, in repeating
silently, 'La ilaha illa-llah' (There is no deity but God); and
let not any living creature see thy lips move in doing so; for
among the peculiar virtues of these words is this, that they may
be uttered without any motion of the lips. Go, and peace be on
thee."--"Accordingly," said my friend, "I went thither. It was a small
square building, crowned by a cupola; and the door was open. I entered,
and seated myself, facing the niche, and the oblong monument over the
grave. It was evening, and I commenced my silent professions of the
Unity, as directed by my guide; and at dusk I saw a white figure seated
beside me, as if assisting in my devotional task. I stretched forth my
hand to touch it; but found that it was not a material substance; yet
there it was: I saw it distinctly. Encouraged by this vision, I
continued my task for three nights and days without intermission,
neither eating not drinking, yet increasing in strength both of body and
of spirit; and on the third day, I saw written upon the whitewashed
walls of the tomb, and on the ground, and in the air, wherever I turned
my eyes, 'La ilaha illa-llah;' and whenever a fly entered the tomb, it
formed these words in its flight. By Allah it was so! My object was now
fully attained: I felt myself endowed with supernatural knowledge:
thoughts of my friends and acquaintances troubled me not; but I knew
where each of them was, in Persia, India, Arabia, and Turkey, and what
each was doing. I experienced an indescribable happiness. This state
lasted several years; but at length I was insensibly enticed back to
worldly objects: I came to this country; my fame as a caligraphist drew
me into the service of the government; and now see what I am, decked
with pelisses and shawls, and with this thing  on my
breast; too old, I fear, to undergo again the self-denial necessary to
restore me to true happiness, though I have almost resolved to make the
attempt."--Soon after this conversation, he was deprived of his office,
and died of the plague. He was well known to have passed several years
as a wandering devotee; and his sufferings, combined with enthusiasm,
perhaps disordered his imagination, and made him believe that he really
saw the strange sights which he described to me; for there was an
appearance of earnestness and sincerity in his manner, such as I thought
could hardly be assumed by a conscious impostor.

Insanity, however, if not of a very violent and dangerous nature, is
commonly regarded by Muslims as a quality that entitles the subject of
it to be esteemed as a saint; being supposed to be the abstraction of
the mind from worldly affairs, and its total devotion to God. This
popular superstition is a fertile source of imposture; for, a reputation
for sanctity being so easily obtained and supported, there are numbers
of persons who lay claim to it from motives of indolence and
licentiousness, eager to receive alms merely for performing the tricks
of madmen, and greedy of indulging in pleasures forbidden by the law;
such indulgences not being considered in their case as transgressions by
the common people, but rather as indications of holy frenzy. From my own
observation I should say that lunatics or idiots, or impostors,
constitute the majority of the persons reputed to be saints among the
Muslims of the present day; and most of those who are not more than
slightly tinged with insanity are darweeshes.

A reputed saint of this description, in Cairo, in whom persons of some
education put great faith, affected to have a particular regard for me.
He several times accosted me in an abrupt manner, acquainted me with the
state of my family in England, and uttered incoherent predictions
respecting me, all of which communications, excepting one which he
qualified with an "in shaa-llah" (or "if it be the will of God"), I must
confess, proved to be true; but I must also state that he was acquainted
with two of my friends who might have materially assisted him to frame
these predictions, though they protested to me that they had not done
so. The following extract from a journal which I kept in Cairo during my
second visit to Egypt, will convey some idea of this person, who will
serve as a picture of many of his fraternity.--To-day (Nov. 6th, 1834),
as I was sitting in the shop of the Basha's booksellers, a reputed
saint, whom I have often seen here, came and seated himself by me, and
began, in a series of abrupt sentences, to relate to me various matters
respecting me, past, present, and to come. He is called the sheykh 'Alee
El-Leysee. He is a poor man, supported by alms; tall and thin and very
dark, about thirty years of age, and wears nothing at present but a blue
shirt and a girdle, and a padded red cap. "O Efendee," he said, "thou
hast been very anxious for some days. There is a grain of anxiety
remaining in thee yet. Do not fear. There is a letter coming to thee by
sea, that will bring thee good news." He then proceeded to tell me of
the state of my family, and that all were well excepting one, whom he
particularized by description, and who he stated to be then suffering
from an intermittent fever.  "This
affliction," he continued, "may be removed by prayer; and the
excellences of the next night, the night of  the
first Friday of the month of Regeb, of Regeb, the holy Regeb, are very
great. I wanted to ask thee for something to-day; but I feared: I feared
greatly. Thou must be invested with the wilayeh [_i. e._ be made a
welee]: the welees love thee; and the Prophet loves thee. Thou must go
to the sheykh Muafa El-Munadee, and the sheykh El-Bahaee. Thou
must be a welee." He then took my right hand, in the manner commonly
practised in the ceremony which admits a person a darweesh, and repeated
the Fateah (commonly pronounced Fat'ah); after which he added, "I
have admitted thee my darweesh." Having next told me of several
circumstances relating to my family--matters of an unusual nature--with
singular minuteness and truth, he added, "To-night, if it be the will of
God, thou shalt see the Prophet in thy sleep, and El-Khir and the
seyyid El-Bedawee. This is Regeb, and I wanted to ask of thee--but I
feared--I wanted to ask of thee four piastres, to buy meat and bread and
oil and radishes. Regeb! Regeb! I have great offices to do for thee
to-night."--Less than a shilling for all he promised was little enough:
I gave it him for the trouble he had taken; and he uttered many abrupt
prayers for me.--In the following night, however, I saw in my sleep
neither Moammad nor El-Khir nor the seyyid El-Bedawee, unless, like
Nebuchadnezzar, I was unable, on awaking, to remember my dreams.

Some reputed saints of the more respectable class, to avoid public
notice, wear the general dress and manners of their fellow-countrymen,
and betray no love of ostentation in their acts of piety and
self-denial; or live as hermits in desert places, depending solely upon
Providence for their support, and are objects of pious and charitable
visits from the inhabitants of near and distant places, and from casual
travellers. Others distinguish themselves by the habit of a darweesh, or
by other peculiarities, such as a long and loose coat (called dil)
composed of patches of cloth of various colours, long strings of beads
hung upon the neck, a ragged turban, and a staff with shreds of cloth of
different colours attached to the top; or obtain a reputation for
miraculous powers by eating glass, fire, serpents, &c. Some of those who
are insane, and of those who feign to be so, go about, even in crowded
cities, in a state of perfect nudity, and are allowed to commit, with
impunity, acts of brutal sensuality which the law, when appealed to,
should punish with death. Such practices are forbidden by the religion
and law even in the cases of saints; but common and deeply-rooted
superstition prevents their punishment. During the occupation of Egypt
by the French, the Commander-in-chief, Menou, applied to the Sheykhs (or
'Ulama) of the city for their opinion "respecting those persons who were
accustomed to go about in the streets in a state of nudity, crying out
and screaming, and arrogating to themselves the dignity of wilayeh,
relied upon as saints by the generality of the people, neither
performing the prayers of the Muslims nor fasting," asking whether such
conduct was permitted by the religion, or contrary to the law. He was
answered, "Conduct of this description is forbidden, and repugnant to
our religion and law and to our traditions." The French General thanked
them for this answer, and gave orders to prevent such practices in
future, and to seize every one seen thus offending; if insane, to
confine him in the Maristan (or hospital and lunatic asylum); and if not
insane, to compel him either to relinquish his disgusting habits, or to
leave the city.--Of reputed saints of this kind, thus writes an
enlightened poet, El-Bedree El-ejazee:--


  "Would that I had not lived to see every fool esteemed among men
     as a ub!
   Their learned men take him as a patron; nay, even as Lord, in place
     of the Possessor of Heaven's throne.
   Forgetting God, they say, 'Such a one from all mankind can remove
     affliction.'
   When he dies, they make for him a place of visitation, and strangers
     and Arabs hurry thither in crowds:
   Some of them kiss his tomb, and some kiss the threshold of the door,
     and the very dust.
   Thus do the idolaters act towards their images, hoping so to obtain
     their favour."

These lines are quoted by El-Jabartee, in his account of a very
celebrated modern saint, the seyyid 'Alee El-Bekree (events of Rabeea
eth-Thanee, 1214). A brief history of this person will not be here
misplaced, as it will present a good illustration of the general
character and actions of those insane individuals who are commonly
regarded as saints.

The seyyid 'Alee El-Bekree was a mejzoob (or insane person) who was
considered an eminent welee, and much trusted in: for several years he
used to walk naked about the streets of Cairo, with a shaven face,
bearing a long nebboot (or staff), and uttering confused language, which
the people attentively listened to, and interpreted according to their
desires and the exigencies of their states. He was a tall, spare man,
and sometimes wore a shirt and a cotton skull-cap; but he was generally
barefooted and naked. The respect with which he was treated induced a
woman, who was called the sheykhah Ammooneh, to imitate his example
further than decency allowed: she followed him whithersoever he went,
covered at first with her izar (or large cotton veil thrown over the
head and body), and muttering, like him, confused language. Entering
private houses with him, she used to ascend to the areems, and gained
the faith of the women, who presented her with money and clothes, and
spread abroad that the sheykh ('Alee) had looked upon her, and affected
her with religious frenzy, so that she had become a weleeyeh, or female
saint. Afterwards, becoming more insane and intoxicated, she uncovered
her face, and put on the clothing of a man; and thus attired she still
accompanied the sheykh, and the two wandered about, followed by numbers
of children and common vagabonds; some of whom also stripped off their
clothes in imitation of the sheykh, and followed, dancing; their mad
actions being attributed (like those of the woman) to religious frenzy,
induced by his look or touch, which converted them into saints. The
vulgar and young, who daily followed them, consequently increased in
numbers; and some of them, in passing through the market-streets,
snatched away goods from the shops, thus exciting great commotion
wherever they went. When the sheykh sat down in any place, the crowd
stopped, and the people pressed to see him and his mad companions. On
these occasions the woman used to mount upon the maabah of a shop, or
ascend a hillock, and utter disgusting language, sometimes in Arabic,
and sometimes in Turkish, while many persons among her audience would
kiss her hands to derive a blessing. After having persevered for some
time in this course, none preventing them, the party entered one day the
lane leading from the principal street of the city to the house of the
aee, and were seized by a Turkish officer there residing, named Jaafar
Kashif, who, having brought them into his house, gave the sheykh some
food, and drove out the spectators, retaining the woman and the
mejzoobs, whom he placed in confinement: he then liberated the sheykh
'Alee, brought out the woman and the mejzoobs and beat them, sent the
woman to the Maristan, and there confined her, and set at large the
rest, after they had prayed for mercy, and clothed themselves, and
recovered from their intoxication. The woman remained a while confined
in the Maristan, and, when liberated, lived alone as a sheykhah,
believed in by men and women, and honoured as a saint with visits and
festivals.

The seyyid 'Alee, after he had thus been deprived of his companions and
imitators, was constrained to lead a different kind of life. He had a
cunning brother, who, to turn the folly of this saint to a good account,
and fill his own purse (seeing how great faith the people placed in him,
as the Egyptians are prone to do in such a case), confined him in his
house, and clothed him, asserting that he had his permission to do so,
and that he had been invested with the dignity of ub. Thus he
contrived to attract crowds of persons, men and women, to visit him. He
forbade him to shave his beard, which consequently grew to its full
size; and his body became fat and stout from abundance of food and rest;
for, while he went about naked, he was, as before mentioned, of a lean
figure. During that period he used generally to pass the night
wandering, without food, through the streets, in winter and summer.
Having now servants to wait upon him, whether sleeping or waking, he
passed his time in idleness, uttering confused and incoherent words,
and sometimes laughing and sometimes scolding; and in the course of his
idle loquacity he could not but let fall some words applicable to the
affairs of some of his listening visiters, who attributed such
expressions to his supernatural knowledge of the thoughts of their
hearts, and interpreted them as warnings or prophecies. Men and women,
and particularly the wives of the grandees, flocked to him with presents
and votive offerings, which enriched the coffers of his brother; and the
honours which he received ceased not with his death. His funeral was
attended by multitudes from every quarter. His brother buried him in the
mosque of Esh-Sharaibee, in the quarter of the Ezbekeeyeh, made for him
a maoorah (or railed enclosure) and an oblong monument over the grave,
and frequently repaired thither with readers of the ur-an,
munshids to sing odes in his honour, flag-bearers, and other
persons, who wailed and screamed, rubbed their faces against the bars of
the window before his grave, and caught the air of the place in their
hands to thrust it into their bosoms and pockets. Men and women came
crowding together to visit his tomb, bringing votive offerings and wax
candles, and eatables of various kinds to distribute for his sake to the
poor.--The oblong monument over his grave, resembling a large
chest, was covered, when I was in Cairo, with a black stuff ornamented
by a line of words from the ur-an, in white characters, surrounding it.
A servant who accompanied me during my rides and walks used often to
stop as we passed this tomb, and touch the wooden bars of the window
above mentioned with his right hand, which he then kissed to obtain a
blessing.

In most cases greater honour is paid to a reputed saint after his death
than he receives in his life. A small, square, whitewashed building,
crowned with a dome, is generally erected as his tomb, surrounding an
oblong monument of stone, brick, or wood, which is immediately over the
sepulchral vault. At least one such building forms a conspicuous object
close by, or within, almost every Arab village; for the different
villages, and different quarters of every town and city, have their
respective patron saints, whose tombs are frequently visited, and are
the scenes of periodical festivals, generally celebrated once in every
year. The tombs of many very eminent saints are mosques; and some of
these are large and handsome edifices, the monument being under a large
and lofty dome, and surrounded by an enclosure of wooden railings, or of
elegantly-worked bronze. In these buildings also, and in some others,
the monument is covered with silk or cotton stuff ornamented with words
from the ur-an, which form a band around it. Many buildings of the more
simple kind erected in honour of saints, and some of the larger
description, are mere cenotaphs, or cover only some relic of the person
to whom they are dedicated. The tombs and cenotaphs or shrines of saints
are visited by numerous persons, and on frequent occasions; most
commonly on a particular day of the week. The object of the visiter, in
general, is to perform some meritorious act, such as taking bread, or
other food, or money, for the poor, or distributing water to the
thirsty, on account of the saint, to increase his rewards in heaven, and
at the same time to draw down a blessing on himself; or to perform a
sacrifice of a sheep, goat, calf, or other animal, which he has vowed to
offer, if blessed with some specific object of desire, or to obtain
general blessings; or to implore the saint's intercession in some case
of need. The flesh of the devoted animal is given to the poor. The
visiters also often take with them palm-branches, or sprigs of myrtle,
or roses or other flowers, to lay upon the monument, as they do when
they visit the tombs of their relations. The visiter walks round the
monument, or its enclosure, from left to right, or with his left side
towards it (as the pilgrims do round the Kaabeh), sometimes pausing to
touch its four angles or corners with his right hand, which he then
kisses; and recites the opening chapter of the ur-an (the Fat'ah)
standing before one or each of its four sides. Some visiters repeat also
the chapter of Ya-Seen (the 36th), or employ a person to recite this, or
even the whole of the ur-an, for hire.

The reciter afterwards declares that he transfers the merit of this work
to the soul of the deceased saint. Any private petition the visiter
offers up on his own account, imploring a favourable answer for the sake
of the saint, or through his intercession; holding his hands before his
face like an open book, and then drawing them down his face. Many a
visiter, on entering the tomb, kisses the threshold, or touches it with
his right hand, which he then kisses; and, on passing by it, persons
often touch the window, and kiss the hand thus honoured.

The great periodical or annual festivals are observed with additional
ceremonies, and by crowds of visiters. These are called Moolids (more
properly Molids); and are held on the anniversary of the birth of the
saint, or in commemoration of that event. Persons are then hired to
recite the ur-an in and near the tomb, during the day; and others,
chiefly darweeshes, employ themselves during the night in performing
zikrs, which consist in repeating the name of God, or the profession of
his unity, &c., in chorus, accompanying the words by certain motions of
the head, hands, or whole body; munshids, at intervals, singing
religious odes or love songs during these performances, to the
accompaniment of a nay, which is a kind of flute, or the arghool, which
is a double reed-pipe. These moolids are scenes of rejoicing and of
traffic, which men and boys and girls attend, to eat sweatmeats, and
drink coffee and sherbets, or to amuse themselves with swinging, or
turning on a whirligig, or witnessing the feats of conjurers, or the
performances of dancers; and to which tradesmen repair to sell or barter
their goods. The visiters to the great moolids of the seyyid Amad
El-Bedawee, at ana, in the Delta of Egypt, which are great fairs as
well as religious festivals, are almost as numerous as the pilgrims at
Mekkeh. During a moolid, the inhabitants of the houses in the
neighbourhood of the tomb hang lamps before their houses, and spend a
great part of the night listening to the story-tellers at the
coffee-shops, or attending the zikrs.

These latter performances, though so common among the Arabs, are
inconsistent with the spirit of the Mohammadan religion, and especially
with respect to music, which was not employed in religious ceremonies
until after the second century of the Flight. The Imam Aboo-Bekr
E-oosee, being asked whether it were lawful or not to be present with
people who assembled in a certain place, and read a portion of the
ur-an; and, after a munshid had recited some poetry, would dance, and
become excited, and play upon tambourines and pipes,--answered, that
such practices were vain, ignorant, and erroneous; not ordained by the
ur-an or the Traditions of the Prophet, but invented by those
Israelites who worshipped the Golden Calf; that the Prophet and his
companions used to sit so quietly that a bird might alight upon the head
of any one of them and not be disturbed; that it was incumbent on the
Sultan and his vicegerents to prevent such persons from entering the
mosques and other places for these purposes; and that no one who
believed in God and the Last Day should be present with them, or assist
them in their vain performances: such, he asserted, was the opinion of
the Imams of the Muslims. Some eminent doctors, however, have
contended for the lawfulness of these practices.

Of the various orders of darweeshes, to which so many of the reputed
saints belong, it is unnecessary here to say more than that they differ
chiefly in unimportant regulations and rites, such as particular forms
of prayer, and modes of zikr; that some distinguish themselves by
peculiar dresses; and that a few pursue a wandering life, and subsist on
alms.

NOTE 64. The reason of this strange proceeding is not stated in the
Cairo edition, but it is in the two other editions which I have before
me.

NOTE 65. Arab etiquette requires that a person should sit upon his knees
and feet in the presence of one of much higher rank, or of one to whom
he would pay especial honour. He should also, in these cases, cover his
hands with his sleeves.

NOTE 66. Kunafeh is a kind of pastry resembling vermicelli, made of
wheat-flour. It is moistened with clarified butter--then baked, and
sweetened with honey or sugar.

NOTE 67. Chess is played somewhat differently in different parts of the
East. The pieces are generally of very simple forms, as the Muslim is
forbidden by his religion to make an image of anything that has life.

NOTE 68. In my original, and in the Breslau edition, the ape is said to
have been the son of the King of the Ebony Islands; but this is a
mistake; for the latter, as before stated, was the father of the lady
who was carried off by Jarjarees.

NOTE 69. The term "leewan" has been explained in No. 12 of the notes to
this chapter.

NOTE 70. This was, and I believe still is, a common battle-cry of the
Arabs, and more commonly used on the occasion of a victory.

NOTE 71. "Dar es-Selam," "the Abode of Peace," or "of Safety," is a name
often given to Baghdad, as it is also to one of the seven stories or
stages of Paradise.

NOTE 72.--_The Mountain of Loadstone._ Several Arab writers describe
this mountain of loadstone. El azweenee, in his account of minerals,
says that the mine of loadstone is on the shore of the Indian Ocean, and
that if the ships which navigate this sea approach the said mine, and
contain anything of iron, it flies from them like a bird, and adheres to
the mountain; for which reason, it is the general custom to make use of
no iron in the construction of the vessels employed in this
navigation. I think that I have met with a similar story in some
Latin author.

NOTE 73. For an explanation of this term, see what I have said on the
subject of prayer in the first of the notes to the Introduction.

NOTE 74. "Khaeeb" signifies "endowed with plenty."

NOTE 75. The remainder of the story of the Third Royal Mendicant is
almost wholly omitted in the Cairo edition. I translate it chiefly from
the Calcutta edition of the first two hundred nights.

NOTE 76.--_On Dreams._ That Dreams are regarded by the Muslims as being
often true warnings or indications of future events I have mentioned in
a former note. This belief, sanctioned by the Prophet, will be well
illustrated by the following anecdote, which was related to me in Cairo,
shortly after the terrible plague of the year 1835, by the sheykh
Moammad E-anawee, who had taken the trouble of investigating the
fact, and had ascertained its truth.

A tradesman, living in the quarter of El-anafee, in Cairo, dreamt,
during the plague above mentioned, that eleven persons were carried out
from his house to be buried, victims of this disease. He awoke in a
state of the greatest distress and alarm, reflecting that eleven was the
total number of the inhabitants of his house, including himself, and
that it would be vain in him to attempt, by adding one or more members
to his household, to elude the decree of God, and give himself a chance
of escape: so, calling together his neighbours, he informed them of his
dream, and was counselled to submit with resignation to a fate so
plainly foreshewn, and to be thankful to God for the timely notice with
which he had been mercifully favoured. On the following day, one of his
children died; a day or two after, a wife; and the pestilence continued
its ravages among his family until he remained in his house alone. It
was impossible for him now to entertain the slightest doubt of the
entire accomplishment of the warning: immediately, therefore, after the
last death that had taken place among his household, he repaired to a
friend at a neighbouring shop, and, calling to him several other persons
from the adjoining and opposite shops, he reminded them of his dream,
acquainted them with its almost complete fulfilment, and expressed his
conviction that he, the eleventh, should very soon die. "Perhaps," said
he, "I shall die this next night: I beg of you, therefore, for the sake
of God, to come to my house early to-morrow morning, and the next morning
and the next if necessary, and to see if I be dead, and, when dead, that
I be properly buried; for I have no one with me to wash and shroud me.
Fail not to do me this service, which will procure you a recompense in
heaven. I have bought my grave-linen: you will find it in a corner of
the room in which I sleep. If you find the door of the house latched,
and I do not answer to your knocking, break it open."

Soon after sunset he laid himself in his lonely bed, though without any
expectation of closing his eyes in sleep; for his mind was absorbed in
reflections upon the awful entry into another world, and a review of his
past life. As the shades of night gathered around him, he could almost
fancy that he beheld, in one faint object or another in his gloomy
chamber, the dreadful person of the Angel of Death: and at length he
actually perceived a figure gliding in at the door, and approaching his
bed. Starting up in horror, he exclaimed, "Who art thou?"--and a stern
and solemn voice answered, "Be silent! I am 'Azraeel, the Angel of
Death!"--"Alas!" cried the terrified man; "I testify that there is no
deity but God, and I testify that Moammad is God's Apostle! There is no
strength nor power but in God, the High! the Great! To God we belong,
and to Him we must return!"--He then covered himself over with his
quilt, as if for protection, and lay with throbbing heart, expecting
every moment to have his soul torn from him by the inexorable messenger.
But moments passed away, and minutes, and hours; yet without his
experiencing any hope of escape; for he imagined that the Angel was
waiting for him to resign himself, or had left him for a while, and was
occupied in receiving first the souls of the many hundred human beings
who had attained their predestined term in that same night and in the
same city, and the souls of the thousands who were doomed to employ him
elsewhere. Daybreak arrived before his sufferings terminated; and his
neighbours, coming according to their promise, entered his chamber, and
found him still in bed; but observing that he was covered up, and
motionless as a corpse, they doubted whether he were still alive, and
called to him. He answered, with a faint voice, "I am not yet dead; but
the Angel of Death came to me in the dusk of the evening, and I expect
every moment his return, to take my soul: therefore trouble me not; but
see me washed and buried."--"But why," said his friends, "was the
street-door left unlatched?"--"I latched it," he answered, "but the
Angel of Death may have opened it."--"And who," they asked, "is the man
in the court?"--He answered, "I know of no man in the court: perhaps the
Angel who is waiting for my soul has made himself visible to you, and
been mistaken, in the twilight, for a man."--"He is a thief," they said,
"who has gathered together everything in the house that he could carry
away, and has been struck by the plague while doing so, and now lies
dead in the court, at the foot of the stairs, grasping in his hand a
silver candlestick."--The master of the house, after hearing this,
paused for a moment, and then, throwing off his quilt, exclaimed,
"Praise be to God, the Lord of all creatures! That is the eleventh, and
I am safe! No doubt it was that rascal who came to me and said that he
was the Angel of Death. Praise be to God! Praise be to God!"

This man survived the plague, and took pleasure in relating the above
story. The thief had overheard his conversation with his neighbours,
and, coming to his house in the dusk, had put his shoulder to the wooden
lock, and so raised the door and displaced the latch within.--There is
nothing wonderful in the dream, nor in its accomplishment; the plague of
1835 entirely desolated many houses, and was mostly fatal to the young;
and all the inhabitants of the house in question were young excepting
the master.

NOTE 77. "'Ajeeb" signifies "a wonder," or "anything strange or
admirable."

NOTE 78. Blue is the colour of mourning, as before mentioned, in No. 52
of the notes to the second chapter.

NOTE 79. Smearing the face and slapping the cheeks are common practices
of Arab women, especially of the lower orders, on following to the
grave the corpse of a near relation or a husband.

NOTE 80.--_On the_ Rukh'. This fabulous bird is described by many Arab
writers, some of whom assert that it can carry a rhinoceros, while
others ascribe to it powers still more extraordinary. I shall have
occasion to speak of it again in my notes to this work.

NOTE 81. This is explained by No. 30 of the notes to the Introduction.

NOTE 82. I here return to the Cairo edition.

NOTE 83. Some of the incidents described in this story, as the
shipwrecks caused by the image, and the opening of the forbidden closet,
&c., appear to be taken from the romance of Seyf Zu-l-Yezen, of which I
possess a copy, purchased during my second visit to Egypt. This romance,
which has become extremely scarce, is filled with stories of genii and
enchantments of the most extravagant kind. Some of the public
story-tellers in Cairo used, a few years since, to amuse their audiences
by recitations from it. I was not able to discover the period at which
it was composed; but it is said to have been written long before the
Tales of a Thousand and One Nights. I saw once a portion of a copy of
which it appeared, from the hand-writing and the paper, to be three or
four centuries old.

NOTE 84. So in the Calcutta edition of the first two hundred nights, and
in the edition of Breslau.

NOTE 85. Those decrees which are written with "the Pen" on the
"Preserved Tablet" are believed to be unchangeable. "The Pen" is also
the title of one of the chapters of the ur-an, the 68th.

NOTE 86. In all the copies of the original which I have by me, El-Barah
is said to have been the place to which the lady designed to voyage; but
this is inconsistent with the sequel of the story.

NOTE 87. In the old version, two strange errors occur in the passage
corresponding with this: two words in the original, "nar" and "doon,"
having been mistaken for a proper name; and the word "jebbar," which,
applied to God, signifies "almighty," or rather the "Compeller of his
creatures to do whatsoever He willeth," being taken in the sense of
"giant," which it bears in many other cases.

NOTE 88.--_On Martyrs._ The Mohammadan law distinguishes several
different descriptions of martyrs. This honourable title is given to the
soldier who dies in fighting for the faith, or on his way to do so, or
who dies almost immediately after his having been wounded when so
engaged; to a person who innocently meets with his death from the hand
of another; to a victim of the plague, who does not flee from the
disease, or of dysentery; to a person who is drowned; and to one who is
killed by the falling of a wall or any building. It is said that the
souls of martyrs, after quitting their bodies, reside, until the day of
resurrection, in the crops of green birds, which eat of the fruits, and
drink of the waters, of Paradise. Such we are to consider as the first
and lowest state of felicity to which the young prince in this tale was
introduced as the reward of his virtue.

NOTE 89. The share inherited, according to the law, by the wife, or by
the wives conjointly when there are more than one, is one-eighth of what
remains of the property of the deceased after the discharge of his debts
and legacies, if he have left issue; and one-fourth, if he have left no
issue.

NOTE 90. The Arabs, fond of hyperbole, often thus describe a lofty
building.

NOTE 91.--_On the Magnificence of Arab Palaces, &c._ After remarking
upon the preceding sentence as presenting an instance of Oriental
hyperbole, it may be necessary to inform the reader that he needs not
regard this in the same light. The magnificence of the palaces of
Baghdad in the times of the Khaleefehs almost exceeds belief.

In the beginning of the year of the Flight 305 (June, A.D. 917), two
ambassadors from the Greek Emperor (Constantine IX., Porphyrogenitus)
arrived in Baghdad on a mission to the Khaleefeh El-Mutedir, bringing
an abundance of costly presents; and the scenes which they witnessed are
thus described; apparently, however, not without some exaggeration. They
were first received by the Wezeer, who, at the audience which he granted
to them in his garden-palace, displayed on this occasion a degree of
magnificence that had never before been manifested by any of his rank;
pages, memlooks, and soldiers, crowded the avenues and courts of his
mansion, the apartments of which were hung with tapestry of the value of
thirty thousand deenars; and the Wezeer himself was surrounded by
generals and other officers on his right and left and behind his seat,
when the two ambassadors approached him, dazzled by the splendour that
surrounded them, to beg for an interview with the Khaleefeh.
El-Mutedir, having appointed a day on which he would receive them,
ordered that the courts and passages and avenues of his palace should be
filled with armed men, and that all the apartments should be furnished
with the utmost magnificence. A hundred and sixty thousand armed
soldiers were arranged in ranks in the approach to the palace; next to
these were the pages of the closets, and chief eunuchs, clad in silk and
with belts set with jewels, in number seven thousand; four thousand
white, and three thousand black: there were also seven hundred
chamberlains; and beautifully ornamented boats of various kinds were
seen floating upon the Tigris, hard by. The two ambassadors passed first
by the palace of the chief chamberlain, and, astonished at the splendid
ornaments and pages and arms which they there beheld, imagined that this
was the palace of the Khaleefeh; but what they had seen here was
eclipsed by what they beheld in the latter, where they were amazed by
the sight of thirty-eight thousand pieces of tapestry of
gold-embroidered silk brocade, and twenty-two thousand magnificent
carpets. Here also were two menageries of beasts by nature wild, but
tamed by art, and eating from the hands of men: among them were a
hundred lions; each lion with its keeper. They then entered the Palace
of the Tree, enclosing a pond from which rose the Tree: this had
eighteen branches, with leaves of various colours (being artificial),
and with birds of gold and silver (or gilt and silvered) of every
variety of kind and size, perched upon its branches, so constructed that
each of them sang. Thence they passed into the garden, in which were
furniture and utensils not to be enumerated: in the passages leading to
it were suspended ten thousand gilt coats of mail. Being at length
conducted before El-Mutedir, they found him seated on a couch of ebony
inlaid with gold and silver, to the right of which were hung nine
necklaces of jewels, and the like to the left, the jewels of which
outshone the light of day. The two ambassadors paused at the distance of
about a hundred cubits from the Khaleefeh, with the interpreter. Having
left the presence, they were conducted through the palace, and were
shewn splendidly-caparisoned elephants, a giraffe, lynxes, and other
beasts. They were then clad with robes of honour, and to each of them
was brought fifty thousand dirhems, together with dresses and other
presents. It is added, that the ambassadors approached the palace
through a street called "the Street of the Menarehs," in which were a
thousand menarehs, or menarets. It was at the hour of noon; and as they
passed, the mueddins from all these menarehs chanted the call to prayer
at the same time, so that the earth almost quaked at the sound, and the
ambassadors were struck with fear.

The Orientals well understand how to give the most striking effect to
the jewels which they display on their dress, &c., on occasions of
state. Sir John Malcolm, describing his reception by the late King of
Persia, says, "His dress baffled all description. The ground of his
robes was white; but he was so covered with jewels of an extraordinary
size, and their splendour, from his being seated where the rays of the
sun played upon them, was so dazzling, that it was impossible to
distinguish the minute parts which combined to give such amazing
brilliancy to his whole figure."

NOTE 92. As this marriage is described as conducted in an irregular
manner, I need say nothing at present of the ceremonies usually
practised on such an occasion.

NOTE 93. Every person who has visited Eastern cities will bear testimony
to the plausibility of this excuse. I have several times been thrown
down by the wide load of a camel in the streets of Cairo, and seen loads
of firewood scraping the houses on both sides of a street at the same
time.

NOTE 94. Women suspected of infidelity to their husbands have not
unfrequently been thus punished in Egypt in modern times, in violation
of the law.

NOTE 95. "Saad" signifies "happiness," or "prosperity," and also
"happy," or "prosperous."

NOTE 96. Pity is of more important service to the Muslim after death
than during life; for the prayers which it inspires increase his
happiness in futurity, or diminish his misery.

NOTE 97. This allusion to religious faith is peculiarly apt in the mouth
of a Muslim; for the chief dogma of his creed is the denial of any
partnership in the Divine essence. He calls persons of all other
religions "mushriks," or those who attribute partners to God.

NOTE 98. In the original, she is here called an 'Efreeteh, which is an
improper term.

NOTE 99. This salutation and its reply are only to be given by and to
Muslims.

NOTE 100. It is implied by this ejaculation that the two ladies were
admirable beauties, evidences of the perfection of their Creator.