Meanwhile the Prince was coming as fast as his horse could carry him.
He was so impatient that he was always full fifty yards in front of the
lords and ladies sent by Tubby to bring back Zizi.

At the sight of the hideous gypsy he was struck dumb with surprise and
horror.

'Ah me!' said Titty, 'so you don't know your poor Zizi? While you were
away the wicked witch came, and turned me into this. But if you only
have the courage to marry me I shall get back my beauty.' And she began
to cry bitterly.

Now the good-natured Desire was as soft-hearted as he was brave.

'Poor girl,' he thought to himself. 'It is not her fault, after all,
that she has grown so ugly, it is mine. Oh! why did I not follow the old
man's advice? Why did I leave her alone? And besides, it depends on
me to break the spell, and I love her too much to let her remain like
this.'

So he presented the gypsy to the lords and ladies of the Court,
explaining to them the terrible misfortune which had befallen his
beautiful bride.

They all pretended to believe it, and the ladies at once put on the
false princess the rich dresses they had brought for Zizi.

She was then perched on the top of a magnificent ambling palfrey, and
they set forth to the castle.

But unluckily the rich dress and jewels only made Titty look uglier
still, and Desire could not help feeling hot and uncomfortable when he
made his entry with her into the city.

Bells were pealing, chimes ringing, and the people filling the streets
and standing at their doors to watch the procession go by, and they
could hardly believe their eyes as they saw what a strange bride their
Prince had chosen.

In order to do her more honour, Tubby came to meet her at the foot of
the great marble staircase. At the sight of the hideous creature he
almost fell backwards.

'What!' he cried. 'Is this the wonderful beauty?'

'Yes, father, it is she,' replied Desire with a sheepish look. 'But she
has been bewitched by a wicked sorceress, and will not regain her beauty
until she is my wife.'

'Does she say so? Well, if you believe that, you may drink cold water
and think it bacon,' the unhappy Tubby answered crossly.

But all the same, as he adored his son, he gave the gypsy his hand and
led her to the great hall, where the bridal feast was spread.