_Source._--The _Kacchapa Jataka_, Fausboll, No. 215; also in his
_Five Jatakas_, pp. 16, 41, tr. Rhys-Davids, pp. viii-x.

_Parallels._--It occurs also in the Bidpai literature, in nearly all
its multitudinous offshoots. See Benfey, _Einleitung_, 84; also my
_Bidpai_, E, 4 _a_; and North's text, pp. 170-5, where it is the
taunts of the other birds that cause the catastrophe: "O here is a
brave sight, looke, here is a goodly ieast, what bugge haue we here,"
said some. "See, see, she hangeth by the throte, and therefor she
speaketh not," saide others; "and the beast flieth not like a beast;"
so she opened her mouth and "pashte hir all to pieces."

_Remarks._--I have reproduced in my edition the original illustration
of the first English Bidpai, itself derived from the Italian block.
A replica of it here may serve to show that it could be used
equally well to illustrate the Pali original as its English
great-great-great-great-great-great grand-child.



_Source._--Knowles, _Folk-Tales of Kashmir_, pp. 32-41. I have reduced
the pieces of advice to three, and curtailed somewhat.

_Parallels._--See _Celtic Fairy Tales_, No. xxii., "Tale of Ivan,"
from the old Cornish, now extinct, and notes _ibid._ Mr. Clouston
points out (_Pop. Tales_, ii. 319) that it occurs in Buddhist
literature, in "Buddaghoshas Parables," as "The Story of Kulla
Pauthaka."

_Remarks._--It is indeed curious to find the story better told in
Cornwall than in the land of its birth, but there can be little doubt
that the Buddhist version is the earliest and original form of the
story. The piece of advice was originally a charm, in which a youth
was to say to himself, "Why are you busy? Why are you busy?" He does
so when thieves are about, and so saves the king's treasures, of which
he gets an appropriate share. It would perhaps be as well if many of
us should say to ourselves "_Ghatesa, ghatesa, kim karana?_"



_Source._--_Pantschatantra_, III. v., tr. Benfey, ii. 244-7.

_Parallels_ given in my _Esop_, Ro. ii. 10, p. 40. The chief points
about them are--(1) though the tale does not exist in either Phedrus
or Babrius, it occurs in prose derivates from the Latin by Ademar, 65,
and "Romulus," ii. 10, and from Greek, in Gabrias, 45, and the prose
_Esop_, ed. Halm, 96; Gitlbauer has restored the Babrian form in his
edition of Babrius, No. 160. (2) The fable occurs among folk-tales,
Grimm, 105; Woycicki, _Poln. Mahr._ 105; Gering, _Islensk. Event._ 59,
possibly derived from La Fontaine, x. 12.

_Remarks._--Benfey has proved most ingeniously and conclusively
(_Einl._ i. 359) that the Indian fable is the source of both Latin and
Greek fables. I may borrow from my _Esop_, p. 93, parallel abstracts
of the three versions, putting Benfey's results in a graphic form,
series of bars indicating the passages where the classical fables have
failed to preserve the original.

           BIDPAI.                |       PHEDRINE.

 A Brahmin once observed a snake  |----A good man had become
 in his field, and thinking it    |friendly with the snake, who
 the tutelary spirit of the       |came into his house and brought
 field, he offered it a libation  |luck with it, so that the man
 of milk in a bowl. Next day he   |became rich through it.----One
 finds a piece of gold in the     |day he struck the serpent, which
 bowl, and he receives this each  |disappeared, and with it the
 day after offering the libation. |man's riches. The good man tries
 One day he had to go elsewhere,  |to make it up, but the serpent
 and he sent his son with the     |declares their friendship at an
 libation. The son sees the gold, |end, as it could not forget the
 and thinking the serpent's hole  |blow.----
 full of treasure determines to   |
 slay the snake. He strikes at    |Phed. Dressl. VII. 28 (Rom. II. xi.)
 its head with a cudgel, and the  |
 enraged serpent stings him to    |            BABRIAN.
 death. The Brahmin mourns his    |A serpent stung a farmer's son
 son's death, but next morning as |to death. The father pursued the
 usual brings the libation of     |serpent with an axe, and struck
 milk (in the hope of getting the |off part of its tail. Afterwards
 gold as before). The serpent     |fearing its vengeance he brought
 appears after a long delay at    |food and honey to its lair, and
 the mouth of its lair, and       |begged reconciliation. The
 declares their friendship at an  |serpent, however, declares
 end, as it could not forget the  |friendship impossible, as it
 blow of the Brahmin's son, nor   |could not forget the blow----nor
 the Brahmin his son's death from |the farmer his son's death from
 the bite of the snake.           |the bite of the snake.
                                  |
_Pants._ III. v. (Benf. 244-7).   |Esop, Halm 96b (Babrius-Gitlb. 160).
                                  |

In the Indian fable every step of the action is thoroughly justified,
whereas the Latin form does not explain why the snake was friendly in
the first instance, or why the good man was enraged afterwards; and
the Greek form starts abruptly, without explaining why the serpent had
killed the farmer's son. Make a composite of the Phedrine and Babrian
forms, and you get the Indian one, which is thus shown to be the
original of both.



_Source._--Steel-Temple, _Wideawake Stories_, pp. 98-110, originally
published in _Ind. Antiq._ x. 147 _seq._

_Parallels._--A long variant follows in _Ind. Antiq._, _l. c._ M.
Cosquin refers to several Oriental variants, _l. c._ p. xxx. _n._ For
the direction tabu, see Note on Princess Labam, _supra_, No. ii. The
"letter to kill bearer" and "letter substituted" are frequent in both
European (see my List _s. v._) and Indian Folk-Tales (Temple,
Analysis, II. iv. _b_, 6, p. 410). The idea of a son of seven mothers
could only arise in a polygamous country. It occurs in "Punchkin,"
_supra_, No. iv.; Day, _Folk-Tales of Bengal_, 117 _seq._; _Ind.
Antiq._ i. 170 (Temple, _l. c._, 398).

_Remarks._--M. Cosquin (_Contes de Lorraine_, p. xxx.) points out how,
in a Sicilian story, Gonzenbach (_Sizil. Mahr._ No. 80), the seven
co-queens are transformed into seven step-daughters of the envious
witch who causes their eyes to be taken out. It is thus probable,
though M. Cosquin does not point this out, that the "envious
step-mother" of folk-tales (see my List, _s. v._) was originally an
envious co-wife. But there can be little doubt of what M. Cosquin
_does_ point out--viz., that the Sicilian story is derived from the
Indian one.


XVII. A LESSON FOR KINGS.

_Source._--_Rajovada Jataka_, Fausboll, No. 151, tr.
Rhys-Davids, pp. xxii.-vi.

_Remarks._--This is one of the earliest of moral allegories in
existence. The moralising tone of the Jatakas must be conspicuous to
all reading them. Why, they can moralise even the Tar Baby (see
_infra_, Note on "Demon with the Matted Hair," No. xxv.).



_Source._--Kingscote, _Tales of the Sun_. I have changed the Indian
mercantile numerals into those of English "back-slang," which make a
very good parallel.



_Source._--Steel-Temple, _Wideawake Stories_, pp. 247-80, omitting
"How Raja Rasalu was Born," "How Raja Rasalu's Friends Forsook Him,"
"How Raja Rasalu Killed the Giants," and "How Raja Rasalu became a
Jogi." A further version in Temple, _Legends of Panjab_, vol. i.
_Chaupur_, I should explain, is a game played by two players with
eight men, each on a board in the shape of a cross, four men to each
cross covered with squares. The moves of the men are decided by the
throws of a long form of dice. The object of the game is to see which
of the players can first move all his men into the black centre square
of the cross (Temple, _l. c._, p. 344, and _Legends of Panjab_, i.
243-5). It is sometimes said to be the origin of chess.

_Parallels._--Rev. C. Swynnerton, "Four Legends about Raja Rasalu," in
_Folk-Lore Journal_, p. 158 _seq._, also in separate book much
enlarged, _The Adventures of Raja Rasalu_, Calcutta, 1884. Curiously
enough, the real interest of the story comes after the end of our part
of it, for Kokilan, when she grows up, is married to Raja Rasalu, and
behaves as sometimes youthful wives behave to elderly husbands. He
gives her her lover's heart to eat, _a la_ Decameron, and she dashes
herself over the rocks. For the parallels of this part of the legend
see my edition of Painter's _Palace of Pleasure_, tom. i. Tale 39, or,
better, the _Programm_ of H. Patzig, _Zur Geschichte der Herzmare_
(Berlin, 1891). Gambling for life occurs in Celtic and other
folk-tales; _cf._ my List of Incidents, _s. v._ "Gambling for Magic
Objects."

_Remarks._--Raja Rasalu is possibly a historic personage, according to
Capt. Temple, _Calcutta Review_, 1884, p. 397, flourishing in the
eighth or ninth century. There is a place called Sirikap ka-kila in
the neighbourhood of Sialkot, the traditional seat of Rasalu on the
Indus, not far from Atlock.

Herr Patzig is strongly for the Eastern origin of the romance, and
finds its earliest appearance in the West in the Anglo-Norman
troubadour, Thomas' _Lai Guirun_, where it becomes part of the Tristan
cycle. There is, so far as I know, no proof of the earliest part of
the Rasalu legend (_our_ part) coming to Europe, except the existence
of the gambling incidents of the same kind in Celtic and other
folk-tales.



_Source._--The _Siha Camma Jataka_, Fausboll, No. 189, trans.
Rhys-Davids, pp. v. vi.

_Parallels._--It also occurs in Somadeva, _Katha Sarit Sagara_, ed.
Tawney, ii. 65, and _n_. For Esopic parallels _cf._ my _Esop_, Av. iv.
It is in Babrius, ed. Gitlbaur, 218 (from Greek prose Esop, ed. Halm,
No. 323), and Avian, ed. Ellis, 5, whence it came into the modern
Esop.

_Remarks._--Avian wrote towards the end of the third century, and put
into Latin mainly those portions of Babrius which are unparalleled by
Phedrus. Consequently, as I have shown, he has a much larger
proportion of Eastern elements than Phedrus. There can be little doubt
that the Ass in the Lion's Skin is from India. As Prof. Rhys-Davids
remarks, the Indian form gives a plausible motive for the masquerade
which is wanting in the ordinary Esopic version.



_Source._--Steel-Temple, _Wideawake Stories_, pp. 215-8.

_Parallels_ enumerated in my _Esop_, Av. xvii. See also Jacques de
Vitry, _Exempla_, ed. Crane, No. 196 (see notes, p. 212), and Bozon,
_Contes moralises_, No. 112. It occurs in Avian, ed. Ellis, No. 22.
Mr. Kipling has a very similar tale in his _Life's Handicap_.

_Remarks._--Here we have collected in modern India what one cannot
help thinking is the Indian original of a fable of Avian. The
preceding number showed one of his fables existing among the Jatakas,
probably before the Christian era. This makes it likely that we shall
find an earlier Indian original of the fable of the Avaricious and
Envious, perhaps among the Jatakas still untranslated.



_Source._--Miss Stokes' _Indian Fairy Tales_, No. 20, pp. 119-137.

_Parallels_ to heroes and heroines in European fairy tales, with stars
on their foreheads, are given with some copiousness in Stokes, _l.
c._, pp. 242-3. This is an essentially Indian trait; almost all Hindus
have some tribal or caste mark on their bodies or faces. The choice of
the hero disguised as a menial is also common property of Indian and
European fairy tales: see Stokes, _l. c._, p. 231, and my List of
Incidents (_s. v._ "Menial Disguise.")



_Source._--Kindly communicated by Mr. M. L. Dames from his unpublished
collection of Baluchi tales.

_Remarks._--Unholy fakirs are rather rare. See Temple, Analysis, I.
ii. _a_, p. 394.



_Source._--Knowles, _Folk-Tales of Kashmir_, pp. 484-90.

_Parallels._--The latter part is the formula of the Clever Lass who
guesses riddles. She has been bibliographised by Prof. Child, _Eng.
and Scotch Ballads_, i. 485; see also Benfey, _Kl. Schr._ ii. 156
_seq._ The sex test at the end is different from any of those
enumerated by Prof. Kohler on Gonzenbach, _Sezil. Mahr._ ii. 216.

_Remarks._--Here we have a further example of a whole formula, or
series of incidents, common to most European collections, found in
India, and in a quarter, too, where European influence is little
likely to penetrate. Prof. Benfey, in an elaborate dissertation ("Die
Kluge Dirne," in _Ausland_, 1859, Nos. 20-25, now reprinted in _Kl.
Schr._ ii. 156 _seq._), has shown the wide spread of the theme both in
early Indian literature (though probably there derived from the folk)
and in modern European folk literature.



_Source._--The _Pancavudha-Jataka_, Fausboll, No. 55, kindly
translated for this book by Mr. W. H. D. Rouse, of Christ's College,
Cambridge. There is a brief abstract of the Jataka in Prof. Estlin
Carpenter's sermon, _Three Ways of Salvation_, 1884, p. 27, where my
attention was first called to this Jataka.

_Parallels._--Most readers of these Notes will remember the central
episode of Mr. J. C. Harris' _Uncle Remus_, in which Brer Fox, annoyed
at Brer Rabbit's depredations, fits up "a contrapshun, what he calls a
Tar Baby." Brer Rabbit, coming along that way, passes the time of day
with Tar Baby, and, annoyed at its obstinate silence, hits it with
right fist and with left, with left fist and with right, which
successively stick to the "contrapshun," till at last he butts with
his head, and that sticks too, whereupon Brer Fox, who all this time
had "lain low," saunters out, and complains of Brer Rabbit that he is
too stuck up. In the sequel Brer Rabbit begs Brer Fox that he may
"drown me as deep ez you please, skin me, scratch out my eyeballs,
t'ar out my years by the roots, en cut off my legs, but do don't fling
me in dat brier patch;" which, of course, Brer Fox does, only to be
informed by the cunning Brer Rabbit that he had been "bred en bawn in
a brier patch." The story is a favourite one with the negroes: it
occurs in Col. Jones' _Negro Myths of the Georgia Coast_ (Uncle Remus
is from S. Carolina), also among those of Brazil (Romero, _Contos do
Brazil_), and in the West Indian Islands (Mr. Lang, "At the Sign of
the Ship," _Longman's Magazine_, Feb. 1889). We can trace it to
Africa, where it occurs in Cape Colony (_South African Folk-Lore
Journal_, vol. i.).

_Remarks._--The five-fold attack on the Demon and the Tar Baby is so
preposterously ludicrous that it cannot have been independently
invented, and we must therefore assume that they are causally
connected, and the existence of the variant in South Africa clinches
the matter, and gives us a landing-stage between India and America.
There can be little doubt that the Jataka of Prince Five Weapons came
to Africa, possibly by Buddhist missionaries, spread among the
negroes, and then took ship in the holds of slavers for the New World,
where it is to be found in fuller form than any yet discovered in the
home of its birth. I say Buddhist missionaries, because there is a
certain amount of evidence that the negroes have Buddhistic symbols
among them, and we can only explain the identification of Brer Rabbit
with Prince Five Weapons, and so with Buddha himself, by supposing the
change to have originated among Buddhists, where it would be quite
natural. For one of the most celebrated metempsychoses of Buddha is
that detailed in the _Sasa Jataka_ (Fausboll, No. 316, tr. R.
Morris, _Folk-Lore Journal_, ii. 336), in which the Buddha, as a hare,
performs a sublime piece of self-sacrifice, and as a reward is
translated to the moon, where he can be seen to this day as "the hare
in the moon." Every Buddhist is reminded of the virtue of
self-sacrifice whenever the moon is full, and it is easy to understand
how the Buddha became identified as the Hare or Rabbit. A striking
confirmation of this, in connection with our immediate subject, is
offered by Mr. Harris' sequel volume, _Nights with Uncle Remus_. Here
there is a whole chapter (xxx.) on "Brer Rabbit and his famous Foot,"
and it is well known how the worship of Buddha's foot developed in
later Buddhism. No wonder Brer Rabbit is so 'cute: he is nothing less
than an incarnation of Buddha. Among the Karens of Burmah, where
Buddhist influence is still active, the Hare holds exactly the same
place in their folk-lore as Brer Rabbit among the negroes. The sixth
chapter of Mr. Smeaton's book on them is devoted to "Fireside
Stories," and is entirely taken up with adventures of the Hare, all of
which can be parallelled from _Uncle Remus_.

Curiously enough, the negro form of the five-fold attack--"fighting
with _five_ fists," Mr. Barr would call it--is probably nearer to the
original legend than that preserved in the Jataka, though 2000 years
older. For we may be sure that the thunderbolt of Knowledge did not
exist in the original, but was introduced by some Buddhist Mr. Barlow,
who, like Alice's Duchess, ended all his tales with: "And the moral of
that is----" For no well-bred demon would have been taken in by so
simple a "sell" as that indulged in by Prince Five-Weapons in our
Jataka, and it is probable, therefore, that _Uncle Remus_ preserves a
reminiscence of the original Indian reading of the tale. On the other
hand, it is probable that Carlyle's Indian god with the fire in his
belly was derived from Prince Five-Weapons.

The negro variant has also suggested to Mr. Batten an explanation of
the whole story which is extremely plausible, though it introduces a
method of folk-lore exegesis which has been overdriven to death. The
_Sasa Jataka_ identifies the Brer Rabbit Buddha with the hare in
the moon. It is well known that Easterns explain an eclipse of the
moon as due to its being swallowed up by a Dragon or Demon. May not,
asks Mr. Batten, the _Pancavudha Jataka_ be an idealised account of
an eclipse of the moon? This suggestion receives strong confirmation
from the Demon's reference to Rahu, who does, in Indian myth swallow
the moon at times of eclipse. The Jataka accordingly contains the
Buddhist explanation why the moon--_i.e._ the hare in the moon, _i.e._
Buddha--is not altogether swallowed up by the Demon of Eclipse, the
Demon with the Matted Hair. Mr. Batten adds that in imagining what
kind of Demon the Eclipse Demon was, the Jataka writer was probably
aided by recollections of some giant octopus, who has saucer eyes and
a kind of hawk's beak, knobs on its "tusks," and a very variegated
belly (gasteropod). It is obviously unfair of Mr. Batten both to
illustrate and also to explain so well the Tar Baby Jataka--taking the
scientific bread, so to speak, out of a poor folk-lorist's mouth--but
his explanations seem to me so convincing that I cannot avoid
including them in these Notes.

I am, however, not so much concerned with the original explanation of
the Jataka as to trace its travels across the continents of Asia,
Africa, and America. I think I have done this satisfactorily, and will
have thereby largely strengthened the case for less extensive travels
of other tales. I have sufficient confidence of the method employed to
venture on that most hazardous of employments, scientific prophecy. I
venture to predict that the Tar Baby story will be found in Madagascar
in a form nearer the Indian than Uncle Remus, and I will go further,
and say that it will _not_ be found in the grand Helsingfors
collection of folk-tales, though this includes 12,000, of which 1000
are beast-tales.



_Source._--Knowles, _Folk-Tales of Kashmir_, pp. 211-25, with some
slight omissions. Gulizar is Persian for rosy-cheeked.

_Parallels._--Stokes, _Indian Fairy Tales_, No. 27. "Panwpatti Rani,"
pp. 208-15, is the same story. Another version in the collection
_Baital Pachisi_, No. 1.

_Remarks._--The themes of love by mirror, and the faithful friend, are
common European, though the calm attempt at poisoning is perhaps
characteristically Indian, and reads like a page from Mr. Kipling.



_Source._--Miss Frere, _Old Deccan Days_, No. 10, pp. 153-5.

_Remarks._--Miss Frere observes that she has not altered the
traditional mode of the Moon's conveyance of dinner to her mother the
Star, though it must, she fears, impair the value of the story as a
moral lesson in the eyes of all instructors of youth.



_Source._--Knowles. _Folk-Tales of Kashmir_, pp. 241-2.

_Parallels._--A Gaelic parallel was given by Campbell in _Trans.
Ethnol. Soc._, ii. p. 336; an Anglo-Latin one from the Middle Ages by
T. Wright in _Latin Stories_ (Percy Soc.), No. 26; and for these and
points of anthropological interest in the Celtic variant see Mr.
Gomme's article in _Folk-Lore_, i. pp. 197-206, "A Highland Folk-Tale
and its Origin in Custom."

_Remarks._--Mr. Gomme is of opinion that the tale arose from certain
rhyming formule occurring in the Gaelic and Latin tales as written on
a mallet left by the old man in the box opened after his death. The
rhymes are to the effect that a father who gives up his wealth to his
children in his own lifetime deserves to be put to death with the
mallet. Mr. Gomme gives evidence that it was an archaic custom to put
oldsters to death after they had become helpless. He also points out
that it was customary for estates to be divided and surrendered during
the owners' lifetime, and generally he connects a good deal of
primitive custom with our story. I have already pointed out in
_Folk-Lore_, p. 403, that the existence of the tale in Kashmir without
any reference to the mallet makes it impossible for the rhymes on the
mallet to be the source of the story. As a matter of fact, it is a
very embarrassing addition to it, since the rhyme tells against the
parent, and the story is intended to tell against the ungrateful
children. The existence of the tale in India renders it likely enough
that it is not indigenous to the British Isles, but an Oriental
importation. It is obvious, therefore, that it cannot be used as
anthropological evidence of the existence of the primitive customs to
be found in it. The whole incident, indeed, is a striking example of
the dangers of the anthropological method of dealing with folk-tales
before some attempt is made to settle the questions of origin and
diffusion.



_Source._--The _Lola Jataka_, Fausboll, No. 274, kindly translated
and slightly abridged for this book by Mr. W. H. D. Rouse.

_Remarks._--We began with an animal Jataka, and may appropriately
finish with one which shows how effectively the writers of the Jatakas
could represent animal folk, and how terribly moral they invariably
were in their tales. I should perhaps add that the Bodhisat is not
precisely the Buddha himself but a character which is on its way to
becoming perfectly enlightened, and so may be called a future Buddha.


The Happy Prince.