At sundown the Caravan set out, and soon reached Birket-el-had, or
"the Pilgrims' Fountain," whence the distance to Cairo was three
leagues. The Caravan had been expected at this time, and the merchants
soon had the pleasure of seeing their friends coming forth from the
city to meet them. They entered through the gate Bebel-Falch, for it
was considered a good omen for those who came from Mecca to enter by
this gate, because the Prophet himself had passed through it.

At the market-place the four Turkish merchants took leave of the
stranger and the Greek Zaleukos, and went home with their friends.
Zaleukos, however, showed his companion a good caravansery, and
invited him to dine with him. The stranger agreed, and promised to
make his appearance as soon as he should have changed his dress. The
Greek made every arrangement for giving a fine entertainment to the
stranger, for whom, upon the journey, he had conceived a deep feeling
of esteem; and when the meats and drink had been brought in in proper
order, he seated himself, waiting for his guest.

He heard slow and heavy steps approaching through the gallery which
led to their apartment. He arose in order to meet him as a friend, and
welcome him upon the threshold; but, full of horror, he started back
as the door opened--the same frightful Red-mantle walked in before
him! His eyes were still turned upon him; it was no illusion: the same
lofty, commanding figure, the mask, from beneath which shone forth the
dark eyes, the red cloak with embroidery of gold--all were but too
well known to him, impressed upon his mind as they had been during the
most awful moments of his life.

The breast of Zaleukos heaved with contending emotions; he had long
since felt reconciled towards this too-well-remembered apparition, and
forgiven him; nevertheless his sudden appearance opened every wound
afresh. All those torturing hours of anguish, that wo which had
envenomed the bloom of his life, rushed back for a moment, crowding
upon his soul.

"What wishest thou, terrible one?" cried the Greek, as the apparition
still stood motionless upon the threshold. "Away with thee, that I may
curse thee not!"

"Zaleukos!" said a well-known voice from under the mask: "Zaleukos! is
it thus that you receive your guest?" The speaker removed the mask,
and threw back his cloak: it was Selim Baruch, the stranger! But still
Zaleukos seemed not at ease, for he too plainly recognised in him the
Unknown of the Ponte Vecchio: nevertheless, old habits of hospitality
conquered; he silently motioned to the stranger to seat himself at the
table.

"I can guess your thoughts," commenced the latter, when they had taken
their places: "your eyes look inquiringly upon me. I might have been
silent, and your gaze would never more have beheld me; but I owe you
an explanation, and therefore did I venture to appear before you in my
former guise, even at the risk of receiving your curse. You once said
to me, 'The faith of my fathers bids me love him; and he is probably
more unhappy than myself:' be assured of this, my friend, and listen
to my justification.

"I must begin far back, in order that you may fully understand my
story. I was born in Alexandria, of Christian parents. My father, the
youngest son of an ancient illustrious French family, was consul for
his native land in the city I have just mentioned. From my tenth year
I was brought up in France, by one of my mother's brothers, and left
my fatherland for the first time a few years after the revolution
broke out there, in company with my uncle, who was no longer safe in
the land of his ancestors, in order to seek refuge with my parents
beyond the sea. We landed eagerly, hoping to find in my father's house
the rest and quiet of which the troubles of France had deprived us.
But ah! in my father's house I found not all as it should be: the
external storms of these stirring times had not, it is true, reached
it; but the more unexpectedly had misfortune made her home in the
inmost hearts of my family. My brother, a promising young man, first
secretary of my father, had shortly before married a young lady, the
daughter of a Florentine noble who lived in our vicinity: two days
before our arrival she had suddenly disappeared, and neither our
family nor her own father could discern the slightest trace of her.
At last they came to the conclusion that she had ventured too far in a
walk, and had fallen into the hands of robbers. Almost agreeable was
this thought to my poor brother, when compared to the truth, which
only too soon became known. The perfidious one had eloped with a young
Neapolitan, with whom she had become acquainted in her father's house.
My brother, who was exceedingly affected by this step, employed every
means to bring the guilty one to punishment; but in vain: his
attempts, which in Naples and Florence had excited wonder, served only
to complete his and our misfortune. The Florentine nobleman returned
to his native land, under the pretence of seeing justice done to my
brother, but with the real determination of destroying us all. He
frustrated all those examinations which my brother had set on foot,
and knew how to use his influence, which he had obtained in various
ways, so well, that my father and brother fell under suspicion of
their government, were seized in the most shameful manner, carried to
France, and there suffered death by the axe of the executioner. My
poor mother lost her mind; and not until ten long months had passed,
did death release her from her awful situation, though for the few
last days she was possessed of perfect consciousness. Thus did I now
stand isolated in the world: one thought alone occupied my whole soul,
one thought alone bade me forget my sorrows; it was the mighty flame
which my mother in her last moments had kindled within me.

"In her last moments, as I said, recollection returned; she had me
summoned, and spoke with composure of our fate, and her own death.
Then she sent all out of the room, raised herself, with a solemn air,
from her miserable bed, and said that I should receive her blessing,
if I would swear to accomplish something with which she would charge
me. Amazed at the words of my dying mother, I promised with an oath to
do whatever she should tell me. She thereupon broke forth in
imprecations against the Florentine and his daughter, and charged me,
with the most frightful threats of her curse, to avenge upon him the
misfortunes of my house. She died in my arms. This thought of
vengeance had long slumbered in my soul; it now awoke in all its
might. I collected what remained of my paternal property, and bound
myself by an oath to stake it all upon revenge, and, rather than be
unsuccessful, to perish in the attempt.

"I soon arrived in Florence, where I kept myself as private as
possible; it was very difficult to put my plan in execution on account
of the situation which my enemy occupied. The old Florentine had
become governor, and thus had in his hand all the means of destroying
me, should he entertain the slightest suspicion. An accident came to
my assistance. One evening I saw a man in well-known livery, walking
through the streets: his uncertain gait, his gloomy appearance, and
the muttered 'Santo sacramento,' and 'Maledetto diavolo,' soon made me
recognise old Pietro, a servant of the Florentine, whom I had formerly
known in Alexandria. There was no doubt but that he was in a passion
with his master, and I resolved to turn his humor to my advantage. He
appeared much surprised to see me there, told me his grievances, that
he could do nothing aright for his master since he had become
governor, and my gold supported by his anger soon brought him over to
my side. Most of the difficulty was now removed: I had a man in my
pay, who would open to me at any hour the doors of my enemy, and from
this time my plan of vengeance advanced to maturity with still greater
rapidity. The life of the old Florentine seemed to me too pitiful a
thing, to be put into the balance with that of my whole family.
Murdered before him, he must see the dearest object of his love, and
this was his daughter Bianca. It was she that had so shamefully
wronged my brother, it was she that had been the author of our
misfortunes. My heart, thirsting for revenge, eagerly drank in the
intelligence, that Bianca was on the point of being married a second
time; it was settled--she must die. But as my soul recoiled at the
deed, and I attributed too little nerve to Pietro, we looked around
for a man to accomplish our fell design. I could hire no Florentine,
for there was none that would have undertaken such a thing against the
governor. Thereupon Pietro hit upon a plan, which I afterwards
adopted, and he thereupon proposed you, being a foreigner and a
physician, as the proper person. The result you know: only, through
your excessive foresight and honesty, my undertaking seemed, at one
time, to be tottering; hence the scene with the mantle.

"Pietro opened for us the little gate in the governor's palace; he
would have let us out, also, in the same secret manner, if we had not
fled, overcome by horror at the frightful spectacle, which, through
the crack of the door, presented itself to our eyes. Pursued by terror
and remorse, I ran on about two hundred paces, until I sank down upon
the steps of a church. There I collected myself again, and my first
thought was of you, and your awful fate, if found within the house.

"I crept back to the palace, but neither of Pietro nor yourself could
I discover a single trace. The door, however, was open, and I could at
least hope that you had not neglected this opportunity of flight.

"But when the day broke, fear of detection, and an unconquerable
feeling of remorse, allowed me to remain no longer within the walls of
Florence. I hastened to Rome. Imagine my consternation, when, after a
few days, the story was everywhere told, with the addition that, in a
Grecian physician, they had detected the murderer. In anxious fear, I
returned to Florence; my vengeance now seemed too great: I cursed it
again and again, for with your life it was purchased all too dearly. I
arrived on the same day which cost you a hand. I will not tell you
what I felt, when I saw you ascend the scaffold, and bear all with
such heroism. But when the blood gushed forth in streams, then was my
resolution taken, to sweeten the rest of your days. What has since
happened you know; it only now remains to tell you, why I have
travelled with you. As the thought that you had never yet forgiven me,
pressed heavily upon me, I determined to spend some days with you, and
at last to give you an explanation of what I had done."

Silently had the Greek listened to his guest; with a kind look, as he
finished, he offered him his right hand.

"I knew very well that you must be more unhappy than I, for that awful
deed will, like a thick cloud, forever darken your days. From my heart
I forgive you. But answer me yet one question: how came you under this
form, in the wilderness? What did you set about, after purchasing my
house in Constantinople?"

"I returned to Alexandria," answered the guest. "Hate against all
mankind raged in my bosom; burning hate, in particular, against that
people, whom they call 'the polished nation.' Believe me, my Moslem
friends pleased me better. Scarcely a month had I been in Alexandria,
when the invasion of my countrymen took place. I saw in them only the
executioners of my father and brother; I, therefore, collected some
young people of my acquaintance, who were of the same mind as myself,
and joined those brave Mamelukes, who were so often the terror of the
French host. When the campaign was finished, I could not make up my
mind to return to the peaceful arts. With my little band of congenial
friends, I led a restless, careless life, devoted to the field and the
chase. I live contented among this people, who honor me as their
chief; for though my Asiatics are not quite so refined as your
Europeans, yet are they far removed from envy and slander, from
selfishness and ambition."

Zaleukos thanked the stranger for his relation, but did not conceal
from him, that he would find things better suited to his rank and
education, if he would live and work in Christian, in European lands.
With delight his companion looked upon him.

"I know by this," said he, "that you have entirely forgiven me, that
you love me: receive, in return, my heartfelt thanks." He sprang up,
and stood in full height before the Greek, whom the warlike air, the
dark sparkling eyes, the deep mysterious voice of his guest, almost
inspired with fear. "Thy proposal is intended kindly," continued he;
"for another it might have charms; but I--I cannot accept it. Already
stands my horse saddled: already do my attendants await me. Farewell,
Zaleukos!"

The friends whom destiny had so strangely thrown together, embraced at
parting. "And how may I call thee? What is the name of my guest, who
will forever live in my remembrance?" exclaimed the Greek.

The stranger gazed at him some time, and said, as he pressed his hand
once more: "They call me 'the lord of the wilderness;' I am THE ROBBER
ORBASAN!"

THE END.